RITESH SINHA V. STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
2019 INSC 855 (2 August 2019)
Justices:  
Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, Justice Deepak Gupta, Justice Sanjiv Khanna

Question(s):  
(i) Does Article 20(3) of the Indian Constitution, which protects an accused person from being compelled to be a witness against himself, also protect them from being compelled to provide a voice sample during an investigation? (ii) If Article 20(3) of the Indian Constitution is not violated, can a Magistrate authorise the recording of a voice sample from the accused person in the absence of specific provisions in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“CrPC”)?
Factual Background:  
The allegations against the accused Appellant Ritesh Sinha and co-accused Dhoom Singh pertained to orchestrating a job scam by promising positions in the police force for money. Pursuant to registration of the FIR, Dhoom Singh was arrested, and his mobile phone was seized to recover potential evidence.

To authenticate a recorded conversation found on Singh’s phone, allegedly involving him and Sinha, the investigating authority sought Sinha’s voice sample. Subsequently, an application was submitted to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who ordered Sinha to provide his voice sample to the investigating officers. Challenging this order, Sinha approached the Allahabad High Court, where his petition was dismissed. Sinha then appealed to the Supreme Court. 

The appeal was heard by a Division Bench (two-judges) of the Supreme Court, resulting in a split verdict. Justice Ranjana Prakash Desai held that the voice sample will come within the purview of the Explanation (a) to Section 53 of CrPC which includes the phrase “such other tests.” Section 53 of the CrPC pertains to examination of the accused by a medical practitioner at the request of a police officer. Explanation (a) to Section 53 states that the examination shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen, swabs in case of sexual offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and fingernail clippings by the use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA profiling and “such other tests” which the registered medical practitioner thinks necessary in a particular case. However, Justice Aftab Alam took the view that compelling an accused to give a voice sample can only be enabled under a new law and not through the process of judicial interpretation. This split decision resulted in the issue being placed before a Three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court.

Decision of the Supreme Court:  
The Three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court, relying on State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu Oghad (1961 INSC 229) (“Kathi Kalu”), held that the prohibition against self-incrimination under Article 20(3) of the Constitution would not be violated if the accused is compelled to provide voice samples. Being compelled to produce purely forensic evidence such as thumb impressions, fingerprints or handwriting is not self-incriminatory, and thus does not violate Article 20(3). Only oral or written testimony based on personal knowledge of the accused is protected from compelled disclosure. The Supreme Court, relying on its extraordinary powers under Article 142 of the Constitution to do ‘complete justice’ (including filling in gaps in statutes) held that a judicial magistrate must be granted authority to order a person to give a voice sample. The judgment of the Court was authored by Chief Justice Gogoi
Reasons for the Decision:  
Compelling accused persons to give voice samples does not violate their right against self-incrimination

The Supreme Court reiterated the test laid down in the decision of Kathi Kalu and held that the testimony by an accused person will be self-incriminatory, only if it is of a character that if taken by itself, incriminates the accused. A specimen handwriting or signature or finger impressions by themselves are no testimony at all; they are only materials for comparison in order to lend assurance to the Court that its inference based on other pieces of evidence is reliable and, hence, they don’t come under the definition of “testimony” (¶9).

The Supreme Court further held that by giving the evidence of specimen handwriting or the impressions of the accused person’s fingers, palm or foot it may be said that the accused person has been compelled to be a witness; it cannot however be said that he has been compelled to be a witness against himself (¶¶18-19).

Judicial power can be exercised to fill the gaps in enactment 

The Supreme Court held that even though the compulsion to give voice samples is not explicitly mentioned in Section 53 or in Sections 53A and 311A of the CrPC, when there is a significant gap in law, judicial interpretation becomes necessary to ensure the effective functioning of the statute and to serve societal interests (¶20). 

The judicial role is not to create laws, but when it concerns the welfare of a large number of individuals who are not directly involved in the case before the Court, the Court must address the lacuna not only by applying the principle of ejusdem generis to the phrase “such other tests” appearing in the explanation (a) to section 53 of Cr PC, but also on the principle of imminent necessity (¶21).

More here: The principle of ‘ejusdem generis’ means ‘of the same kind or nature’. It is used to interpret unclear or general terms in a list, suggesting that these terms should be understood in the context of the more specific items listed before them. The principle of imminent necessity allows courts to fill significant gaps in the law to ensure the statute functions effectively and serves societal interests, even if the specific action, like giving voice samples, is not explicitly mentioned.



Prepared by  Zuber Ali (Intern)

Centre for Research and Planning, Supreme Court of India 

