JARNAIL SINGH V. LACHHMI NARAIN GUPTA .
2018 INSC 881 (26 September 2018)
Justices:  
Chief Justice Dipak Misra, Justice Kurian Joseph, Justice  R.F. Nariman, Justice  Sanjay Kishan Kaul, Justice Indu Malhotra.
Question(s):  
(i) Whether the correctness of the Constitution Bench (Five Judges) decision in M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006 INSC 711), (“Nagaraj”) should be reconsidered by a Seven-Judge Bench. (ii) Whether the requirement in Nagaraj that quantifiable data concerning the backwardness of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (“SCs and STs”) should be collected prior to granting reservation is valid. (iii) Whether the doctrine of ‘creamy layer’ is applicable to the SCs and STs for the purposes of promotions in public employment.
Factual Background:  
This case emanated from two reference orders passed by a Division Bench (Two-Judge) of the Supreme Court (State of Tripura v. Jayanta Chakraborty, 2017 INSC 1113) (“Jayanta Chakraborty”) and a Three-Judge Bench (State of Maharashtra v. Vijay Ghogre, (2018) 17 SCC 261) (“Vijay Ghogre”). The questions posed in these cases involved the interpretation of Articles 16(4), 16(4A) and 16(4B) of the Constitution of India against the backdrop of two previous decisions of the Supreme Court — Indra Sawhney v. Union of India (“Indra Sawhney”) (1996 INSC 1273), a decision by nine judges, and Nagaraj, a decision by five judges. 

The Supreme Court in Jayanta Chakraborty found that a question of further and finer interpretation on the application of Article 16(4A) has arisen and referred it to a Constitution Bench. Subsequently, in Vijay Ghogre, the Court without going into the merits of Jayanta Chakraborty i.e. whether a Two-Judge Bench could directly refer a matter to a larger Bench under Article 145(3) of the Constitution of India when there is already a decision of Constitution Bench, found it appropriate to refer the issue to a Constitution Bench to determine whether Nagaraj requires reconsideration.

In Nagaraj, a 2006 Constitution Bench decision had upheld the constitutional validity of the constitutional amendments which had introduced Article 16(4A) and 16(4B) into the Constitution of India. These amendments provided reservation in promotions for SC and ST employees and the carrying forward of unfilled SC and ST posts. 

The Supreme Court in Nagraj noted that the State is not bound to make reservations for SCs and STs in matters of promotion. However, if it chooses to do so, the State has to collect quantifiable data showing the backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment The State must also comply with Article 335 of the Constitution of India which provides for the maintenance of efficiency in administration while considering the claims of SCs, and STs to appointments in public sector posts. The Constitution Bench in Nagraj also held that the ‘creamy layer’ doctrine, which excludes socially and educationally advanced members of the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) from getting reservation based on income-wealth criteria, was also applicable to the  SCs and STs.

In the present case, the Union of India India argued that both these findings were incorrect, as they were contrary to the Nine-Judge Bench decision in Indra Sawhney.
Decision of the Supreme Court:  
The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court declined to refer the correctness of Nagraj to a Seven-Judge-Bench. The Court held that the declaration in Nagraj that quantifiable data should be collected for the purposes of determining backwardness and inadequacy of representation of SC and ST classes is contrary to the Nine-Judge-Bench decision in Indra Sawhney and hence incorrect. The Court also ruled that the doctrine of ‘creamy layer’ is applicable to reservations for SCs and STs and courts could themselves exclude the creamy layer from reservations. The judgment of the Court was authored by Justice Nariman. 

Reasons for the Decision:  
Collection of quantifiable data contrary to Indra Sawhney

The Supreme Court found that the declaration in Nagaraj that the State has to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the SCs and STs is contrary to the judgment of the Nine-Judge-Bench in Indra Sawhney. In Indra Sawhney, it was held that the test of social and educational backwardness cannot be applied to SCs and STs, who unquestionably fall within the category of backward class of citizens deserving of reservation. This is in part because SCs and STs are identified by Presidential notifications under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution, and such notifications are themselves based on socio-economic exclusion (¶14). Therefore, it would be improper to require reservations for SCs and STs to be based on quantifiable data. 

Applicability of the creamy layer doctrine to SC and SC reservations permissible

The Supreme Court also held that although Indra Sawhney did not rule on the applicability of creamy layer doctrine to SCs and STs, the doctrine was always a facet of constitutional equality located in Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution of India (¶¶8,15). This is because equality will not be served if a creamy layer of elites with a subjugated group capture the benefits of reservation (¶15). The Court thus ruled that the creamy layer could be excluded from reservations even in the case of SCs and STs (¶15). Further, the Court ruled that the courts exclusion of the creamy layer of SCs and STs from reservations does not amount to an interference with the President’s power to identify and designate SCs and STs under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution (¶15).