IN RE ARTICLE 370 OF THE CONSTITUTION V.
2020 INSC 253 (2 March 2020)
Justices:  Justice Nuthalapati V. Ramana, Justice Sanjay K. Kaul, Justice Ramayyagari S. Reddy, Justice Bhushan R. Gavai, and Justice Surya Kant
Question(s):  Whether a larger bench (more than five judges) is required to hear the matter concerning the removal of Article 370 of the Constitution in view of the alleged conflict between the decisions in Prem Nath Kaul v. State of Jammu and Kashmir (“Prem Nath Kaul”) and Sampat Prakash v. State of Jammu and Kashmir (“Sampat Prakash”)
Factual Background:  
Following the execution of the ‘Instrument of Accession’ by the Maharaja of Kashmir with India in October 1947, Article 370 was added to the Indian Constitution and provided for special provisions concerning the State of Jammu and Kashmir (“J&K”). This article restricted the legislative authority of the Union Parliament over J&K. The entire Constitution of India was not applicable to the J&K, and J&K had its own Constitution. Further, according to Article 370(3), the special status of J&K could not be amended or repealed, unless the Constituent Assembly of J&K recommended it. 

On 20 December 2018, President’s Rule (State emergency) was imposed in J&K. On 5 August 2019, two Constitution Orders (“C.O.s”) were issued by the President in exercise of his power under Article 370. C.O. 272 made all the provisions of the Constitution of India applicable to J&K, and rendered the Constitution of J&K obsolete. It also allowed for the removal of Article 370 of the Indian Constitution based on the recommendation of the State Legislature of J&K instead of the J&K Constituent Assembly.  Given that J&K was under President’s rule, the powers of the J&K State Legislature were exercised by  the Union Parliament, which recommended the repeal of Article 370. Subsequently, C.O. 273 was issued, which repealed Article 370 upon the recommendation of Parliament, thereby eliminating the special status of J&K.

While the constitutional validity of C.O. 272 and C.O. 273 was under challenge before a Constitution Bench (five judges), a reference was sought to a larger bench in view of an apparent conflict between the two Constitution Bench (five judge) decisions of Prem Nath Kaul (1959 INSC 17) and Sampat Prakash (1968 INSC 265). 

The Petitioners argued that the Supreme Court in Prem Nath Kaul had held that the Indian Government’s Parliamentary and Presidential powers over J&K were subject to the final approval of the J&K Constituent Assembly. Therefore, in the Petitioners’ arguments, once the Constituent Assembly was dissolved, the Indian Government’s powers to pass C.O.s concerning J&K under Article 370 ceased to be exercisable because there was no Constituent Assembly to approve such C.O.s. Despite this, the subsequent decision in Sampat Prakash upheld the validity of a C.O. concerning J&K after the Constituent Assembly of J&K was dissolved. Therefore, it was contended that Prem Nath Kaul and Sampat Prakash were in conflict with each other as they took different views on whether the President’s powers to issue C.O.s concerning J&K continued to operate after the Constituent Assembly of J&K was dissolved.
Decision of the Supreme Court:  
The Constitution Bench (five judges) of the Supreme Court unanimously concluded that there is no conflict between the judgments in the Prem Nath Kaul and the Sampat Prakash.  The Court therefore declined to refer the issue to a larger bench. The Court also held that the case of Sampat Prakash was not incorrect because it failed to consider the earlier decision in Prem Nath Kaul. This decision paved the way for the legality of abolition of Article 370 to be decided by a Constitution Bench (five judges) as opposed to a larger bench of seven judges.
Reasons for the Decision:  
No conflict between the judgments

The Supreme Court held that the judgments in Prem Nath Kaul and Sampat Kumar should be read in their respective contexts. The circumstances in which these cases were decided, and the issues involved in each case, were completely different. 

The Supreme Court observed that in Prem Nath Kaul, the issue before the Court was the legislative competence of the Yuvraj to pass ‘J&K Big Landed Estate (Abolition) Act, 1950’ (¶38). This law was passed before the adoption of the Constitution of J&K, but after coming into force of the Constitution of India. It was in this context that the Court in Prem Nath Kaul made certain observations regarding the importance given to the decision of the J&K Constituent Assembly. Article 370(2) was a temporary measure which required the interim State Government to place its decisions before the J&K Constituent Assembly for final ratification. This was because at the time, the Constitution of J&K was not finalised, so the Constituent Assembly was to finalise the decisions taken by the State Government. Thus, the Court held the requirement of placing the decisions taken by the State Government before the Constituent Assembly of J&K and the finality accorded to the Assembly’s decisions in Prem Nath Kaul was limited to the decisions taken prior to the J&K Constituent Assembly being convened and dissolved. The decision in Prem Nath Kaul was not concerned with the operation of Article 370 of the Constitution of India after the J&K Constituent Assembly was dissolved. (¶¶42-44).

In Sampat Prakash, the issue pertained to the detention of a petitioner who had challenged the modification of C.O.s under Article 370 which had extended the validity of a preventive detention law. Thus, Sampat Prakash was the first time that the Court directly dealt with the question of continuance of the President’s powers under Article 370 after the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly of J&K (¶40). Given these differing contexts, there was no conflict between Prem Nath Kaul and Sampat Prakash. 

Rule of per incuriam

The Supreme Court held that the rule of per incuriam has been developed as an exception to the doctrine of judicial precedent. It means a judgment passed in ignorance of a relevant statute or any other binding authority (¶28). Noting that Sampat Prakash did not make any observations contrary to those made in Prem Nath Kaul because they dealt with two factually and legally distinct periods in J&K, the Court held that the case of Sampat Prakash was not per incuriam (¶46).