THE STATE OF KERALA V. LEESAMMA JOSEPH
2021 INSC 309 (28 June 2021)
Justices:  
Justice Sanjay K. Kaul and Justice Ramayyagari S. Reddy
Question(s):  
Whether the Respondent can be promoted under a promotion quota for persons with disabilities (“PwDs”) despite the fact that she was not appointed under a PwD quota.
Factual Background:  
In 1995, Parliament enacted the the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act (“PwD Act 1995”) which was later replaced by the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (“RPwD Act 2016”).

Leesamma Joseph the Respondent, was appointed as a Typist/Clerk in the Kerala Police Department in 1996 on compassionate grounds after her brother had passed away during service. The Respondent had Post Polio Residual Paralysis (L) and her permanent disability had been assessed at fifty-five percent. She cleared departmental tests for promotion and was promoted to Lower Division Clerk (“LDC”) in July 2001. She was later promoted to Senior Clerk in September 2004, and then  to the post of Cashier in May 2015.

The Respondent claimed that she was entitled to earlier promotion as a Senior Clerk with effect from July 2002, and as a Cashier with effect from May 2012, with all consequential benefits, and also promotion to Junior Superintendent. This claim was made on the basis of her entitlement to PwD reservation under the provisions of the PwD Act 1995.

The Kerala Administrative Tribunal rejected her plea stating that the rule of recruitment in the State of Kerala, general rules, and other orders issued by the government under Section 32 of the PwD Act 1995 did not provide for any reservation in promotion but only on initial appointments.The Kerala High Court set aside the decision of the Kerala Administrative Tribunal, and ruled in favor of the Respondent, holding that PwDs are entitled to reservation in promotions. The State of Kerala appealed this decision in the Supreme Court.

Decision of the Supreme Court:  
A Division Bench (two judges) of the Supreme Court held that the PwD Act 1995 mandates reservation in promotions for persons with disabilities, and the Respondent was entitled to the claimed promotions with retrospective effect. The Court directed the State of Kerala to implement the judgment of the Supreme Court in the cases of Rajeev Kumar Gupta v Union of India (2016 INSC 482) and Siddaraju v State of Karnataka (2020 INSC 36) within three months to provide for reservation in promotion in all identified posts. In these cases, the Supreme Court had ruled that three percent reservation must be provided to PwDs including in promotions.

Reasons for the Decision:  
Not a criterion for promotion

The Supreme Court referred to its previous decisions and stated that once a position was identified for a PwD quota, it had to be set aside for such persons regardless of how the State planned to fill that position (¶17). The Court noted that the mode of entry in service was not a relevant criterion for promotion for persons who were part of the disability quota (¶27). A person with a disability would be considered for promotion along with other persons working in the feeder cadre (¶20). 

The Supreme Court held that it would be discriminatory and violative of the mandate of the Constitution of India if the Respondent was not considered for promotion in the PwD quota on the pretext that the Respondent was not initially appointed in the quota for PwD in the feeder cadre (¶27). The Court stated that once the Respondent had been appointed, she had to be treated identically to others in PwDs (¶27).

The Supreme Court also clarified that the 1995 Act did not make a distinction between a person who may have entered service on account of disability, and the person who may have acquired disability after having entered the service (¶27). The mode of entry in service was not a ground to deny promotion based on reservation provided to PwDs (¶27).

Interpretation of the PwD Act 1995

The Supreme Court stated that the mandate of Section 32 of the PwD Act 1995 required the government to identify the posts that can be filled up by PwDs in establishments that are either created by statute or owned or controlled by the government or local authority (¶20). Thus, this meant that even the posts in promotional cadres must be identified for persons with disability and such posts must be reserved for them (¶20). The identification of such posts in promotional cadres is necessary for reservations in promotion for persons with disability (¶20).

The Supreme Court stated that once a post is identified, the logical conclusion would be that it would be reserved for persons with disabilities who have been promoted (¶20). The absence of rules to provide for reservation in promotion would not defeat the rights of persons with disability to a reservation in promotion since that right flows from the law (¶20).

Interpretation of the RPwD Act 2016

The Supreme Court referred to Vikash Kumar v Union Public Service Commission (2021 INSC 78) where it had held that the government must not discriminate and must provide reasonable accommodations and create an accessible work environment for employees with disabilities. The Court found that these principles mandate that an employee who acquires a disability during service should not be denied promotion solely based on that disability (¶23).