1
 REPORTABLE
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3613 OF 2016
 Rajendra Diwan              
Pradeep Kumar Ranibala & Anr.                        
WITH 
CA. NO. 10214 OF 2016
 AND 
C.A. NO. 3051 OF 2017
 J U D G M E N T
 Indira Banerjee, J.
 …... Appellant
 versus 
….Respondents
 This appeal, purportedly under Section 13(2) of the
 Chhattisgarh Rent Control Act, 2011, hereinafter referred to as the
 “Rent Control Act”, is against an order dated 1.12.2015 of the Rent
 Control Tribunal at Raipur, confirming an order dated 14.09.2015
 passed by the Rent Control Authority,  whereby an application filed
 by the respondent-landlord for eviction of the appellant tenant
under Section 12 of the Rent Control Act has been allowed. 
2
 2.
 3.
 Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act provides:- 
(1)
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
 contained in this Act, a landlord and/or tenant aggrieved
 by any order of the Rent Controller shall have the right to
 appeal in the prescribed manner within the prescribed
 time to the Rent Control Tribunal. 
(2)
 Appeal against an order of the Rent Control
 Tribunal shall lie with the Supreme Court.
 By an order dated 18.4.2016, a Bench of this Court
 expressed serious doubts about the maintainability of the appeal,
 observing that the State of Chhattishgarh prima facie lacked
 legislative competence to enact law providing for statutory appeals
 directly to the Supreme Court, from the orders of a Tribunal.
 Notice was, accordingly, directed to be issued to the Attorney
 General for India and the Advocate General for the State of
 Chhattisgarh. 
4.
 On 19.4.2017, another Bench of this Court heard amongst
 others, the Advocate General for the State of Chhattisgarh.  The
 Advocate General, inter alia, argued that the Rent Control Act
 having received the assent of the President of India, Section 13(2)
 thereof was protected by Article 138(2) read with Article 200 of the
 Constitution of India and was valid and enforceable. 
5.
 After hearing Counsel and the learned Advocate General for
 the State of Chhattisgarh, the Bench was of the view that the
 appeal involved a substantial question of law as to the
3
 interpretation of the Constitution, and accordingly referred the
 appeal to the Chief Justice of India, for assignment to a
 Constitution Bench of this Court, in terms of Article 145(3) of the
 Constitution. The Chief Justice has referred the appeal to this
 Bench. 
6.
 The question which requires to be determined by this Bench
 is, whether Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act is ultra vires the
 Constitution of India, by reason of  lack of legislative competence
 of the Chhattisgarh State legislature to enact the provision. 
7.
 Before dealing with the arguments advanced before this
 Bench, the relevant provisions of the Constitution of India are set
 out hereinbelow for convenience:- 
“124. Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court
 (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a
 Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes
 a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges
 …….
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 130. Seat of Supreme Court. - The Supreme Court shall sit
 in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of
 India may, with the approval of the President, from time to
 time, appoint.
 131: Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme
 Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original
 jurisdiction in any dispute 
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States;
 or
4
 (b) between the Government of India and any State or States
 on one side and one or more other States on the other; or
 (c) between two or more States, if and in so far as the dispute
 involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the
 existence or extent of a legal right depends:
 Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a dispute
 arising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement,
 sanad or other similar instrument which, having been entered
 into or executed before the commencement of this
 Constitution, 
continues 
in 
operation 
after 
such
 commencement, or which provides that the said jurisdiction
 shall not extend to such a dispute.
 132: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals
 from High Courts in certain cases.
(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any
 judgement, decree or final order of a High Court in the territory
 of India, whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, if the
 High Court certifies under article 134A that the case involves a
 substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
 Constitution.
 (2) ……. omitted w.e.f. 1.8.1979
 (3) Where such a certificate is given, any party in the case may
 appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such
 question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided.
 Explanation.- For the purpose of this article, the expression
 “final order” includes an order deciding an issue which, if
 decided in favour of the appellant, would be sufficient for the
 f
 inal disposal of the case.
 133: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals
 from High Courts in regard to civil matters.
(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any
 judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High
 Court in the territory of India if the High Court certifies under
 under Article 134A
5
 (a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of
 general importance; and
 (b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question
 needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party
 appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) may urge as
 one of the grounds in such appeal that a substantial question
 of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution has been
 wrongly decided.
 (3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall,
 unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, lie to the
 Supreme Court from the judgement, decree or final order of
 one Judge of a High Court.
 134: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard
 to criminal matters.
(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any
 judgement, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of
 a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court 
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused
 person 
and 
sentenced 
him 
to 
death; 
or
 (b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court
 subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the
 accused person and sentenced him to death; or
 (c) certifies under article 134A that the case is a fit one for
 appeal to the Supreme Court:
 Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to
 such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1)
 of article 145 and to such conditions as the High Court may
 establish or require.
 (2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any
 further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any
 judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a
 High Court in the territory of India subject to such conditions
 and limitations as may be specified in such law.
134A: Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.
6
 Every High Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final
 order, or sentence, referred to in clause (1) of article 132 or
 clause (1) of article 133, or clause (1) of article 134. 
(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and
 (b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the
 party aggrieved, immediately after the passing or making of
 such judgment, decree, final order or sentence,
 determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making,
 the question whether a certificate of the nature referred to in
 clause (1) of article 132, or clause (1) of article 133 or, as the
 case may be, sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134, may be
 given in respect of that case.
 135: Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under
 existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.
Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the Supreme Court
 shall also have jurisdiction and powers with respect to any
 matter to which the provisions of article 133 or article 134 do
 not apply if jurisdiction and powers in relation to that matter
 were exercisable by the Federal Court immediately before the
 commencement of this Constitution under any existing law.
 136: Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme
 Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from
 any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any
 cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the
 territory of India.
 (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment,
 determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court
 or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the
 Armed Forces.
 137: Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme
 Court.
Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any
 rules made under article 145, the Supreme Court shall have
 power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.
7
 138: Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme
 Court.
(1) The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and
 powers with respect to any of the matters in the Union List as
 Parliament may by law confer.
 (2) The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and
 powers with respect to any matter as the Government of India
 and the Government of any State may by special agreement
 confer, if Parliament by law provides for the exercise of such
 jurisdiction and powers by the Supreme Court.
 139: Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to
 issue certain writs.
Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court power to
 issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of
 habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and
 certiorari, or any of them, for any purposes other than those
 mentioned in clause (2) of article 32.
 139A: Transfer of certain cases.
(1) Where cases involving the same or substantially the same
 questions of law are pending before the Supreme Court and
 one or more High Courts or before two or more High Courts and
 the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an
 application made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party
 to any such case that such questions are substantial questions
 of general importance, the Supreme Court may withdraw the
 case or cases pending before the High Court or the High Courts
 and dispose of all the cases itself:
 Provided that the Supreme Court may after determining the
 said questions of law return any case so withdrawn together
 with a copy of its judgment on such questions to the High
 Court from which the case has been withdrawn, and the High
 Court shall on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in
 conformity with such judgment.
 (2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient so to do
 for the ends of justice, transfer any case, appeal or other
 proceedings pending before any High Court to any other High
 Court.
140: Ancillary powers of Supreme Court.
8
 Parliament may by law make provision for conferring upon the
 Supreme Court such supplemental powers not inconsistent
 with any of the provisions of this Constitution as may appear to
 be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling the court
 more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it
 by or under this Constitution.
 141: Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all
 courts.
The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all
 courts within the territory of India.
 142: Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme
 Court and orders as to discovery, etc.
(1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may
 pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing
 complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and
 any decree so passed or order so made shall be enforceable
 throughout the territory of India in such manner as may be
 prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until
 provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the
 President may by order prescribe.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
 Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects the whole of
 the territory of India, have all and every power to make any
 order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any
 person, the discovery or production of any documents, or the
 investigation or punishment of any contempt of itself.
 143: Power of President to consult Supreme Court.
(1) If at any time it appears to the President that a question of
 law or fact has arisen, or is likely to arise, which is of such a
 nature and of such public importance that it is expedient to
 obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer
 the question to that Court for consideration and the Court may,
 after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its
 opinion thereon.
 (2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in the proviso
 to article 131, refer a dispute of the kind mentioned in the said
9
 proviso to the Supreme Court for opinion and the Supreme
 Court shall, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the
 President its opinion thereon.
 144: Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the
 Supreme Court.
All authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory of India shall
 act in aid of the Supreme Court.
 145: Rules of Court, etc.
(1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament,
 the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of
 the President, make rules for regulating generally the practice
 and procedure of the Court….”
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 200. Assent to Bills. When a Bill has been passed by the
 Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State
 having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses
 of the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented to the
 Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents
 to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he
 reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President: 
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the
 presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is
 not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the
 House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified
 provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the
 desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may
 recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the
 House or Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the
 Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with or without
 amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the
 Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom: 
Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall
 reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which in
10
 the opinion of the Governor would, if it became law, so
 derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the
 position which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.
 201. Bill reserved for consideration.- When a Bill is
 reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President,
 the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or
 that he withholds assent therefrom: 
Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President
 may direct the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as
 the case may be, the Houses of the Legislature of the State
 together with such a message as it mentioned in the first
 proviso to Article 200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the House
 or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six
 months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is
 again passed by the House or Houses with or without
 amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his
 consideration.
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the
 Legislatures of States.
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament
 may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of
 India, and the Legislature of a State may make laws for the
 whole or any part of the State
 (2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on
 the ground that it would have extra territorial operation.
 246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by
 the Legislatures of States.- (1) Notwithstanding anything in
 clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive power to make
 laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in
 the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
“Union List”).
 11
 (2) 
Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament and,
 subject to clause (1), the Legislature of any State also, have
 power to make laws with respect to any of the matters
 enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule (in this
 Constitution referred to as the “Concurrent List”).
 (3)     
Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any
 State has exclusive power to make laws for such State or any
 part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in
 List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to
 as the “State List”).
 (4)
 Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any
 matter for any part of the territory of India not included in a
 State notwithstanding that such matter is a matter
 enumerated in the State List.
 247. Power of Parliament to provide for the
 establishment of certain additional courts.
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament may by
 law provide for the establishment of any additional courts for
 the better administration of laws made by Parliament or of any
 existing laws with respect to a matter enumerated in the Union
 List.
 248. Residuary powers of legislation.
(1) Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with
 respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or
 State List
 (2) Such power shall include the power of making any law
 imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those Lists
 262. Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter
State rivers or river valleys.- (1) Parliament may by law
 provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with
12
 respect to the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in,
 any inter-State river or river valley.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament
 may by law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any
 other court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such
 dispute or complaint as is referred to in clause (1).
 348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in
 the High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.- (1)
 Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
 Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High
 Court,
 (b) the authoritative texts
(i)  of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be
 moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or either
 House of the Legislature of a State,
 (ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State
 and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the
 Governor of a State, and
 (iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under
 this Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the
 Legislature of a State,
 shall be in the English language.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1),
 the Governor of a State may, with the previous consent of the
 President, authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other
 language used for any official purposes of the State, in
 proceedings in the High Court having its principal seat in that
 State:
 Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any
 judgment, decree or order passed or made by such High
 Court.”
 8.
 Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant
 submitted that the Rent Control Act has been enacted by the
13
 Chhattisgarh State Legislature, in exercise of legislative power
 conferred by Entry 18 of List II, that is, the State List in the Seventh
 Schedule to the Constitution of India.  
9.
 Counsel argued that Entry 77 of List I, that is, the Union List,
 confers exclusive power to the Union Legislature, to legislate with
 regard to the constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of
 the Supreme Court, including contempt of such Court, whereas
 Entry 65 of the State List enables the State Legislature to legislate
 in respect of the jurisdiction and power of all Courts, except the
 Supreme Court.
 10. Learned Counsel argued that Section 13(2) of the Rent
 Control Act does not confer any additional jurisdiction to the
 Supreme Court, which the Supreme Court did not otherwise
 possess. Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act confers appellate
 jurisdiction to the Supreme Court of India, which the Supreme
 Court, in any case, always had and still has under Article 136 of
 the Constitution.  
11. Learned Counsel further argued that Entry 77 enables the
 Union Parliament to legislate with regard to the constitution,
 organization, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court of
 India.  According to Counsel, the scope of this Entry cannot be
 widened to include the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
14
 12. Counsel emphatically asserted that Article 138(1) provides
 that the Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and
 powers with respect to any of the matters in the Union List, as
 Parliament may by law confer. This provision, according to Counsel,
 can only be understood to include the original jurisdiction of the
 Supreme Court.  
13. Counsel argued that Article 138(2) provides that the
 Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers with
 respect to any matter, as Government of India and the
 Government of any State may, by special agreement, confer, if
 Parliament by law provides for exercise of such jurisdiction and
 powers by the Supreme Court. 
14. Learned Counsel next argued that Section 13(2) of the Rent
 Control Act is in consonance with Article 138, read with Article 200
 of the Constitution of India, which enables the State Legislature to
 enact law curtailing the jurisdiction of the High Court, subject to
 the assent of the President of India.  
15. Counsel further argued that if, in the opinion of the
 Governor, any Bill, if it becomes law, would so derogate from the
 powers of the High Court, as to endanger the position which the
 High Court is by the Constitution, designed to fill, the Governor is
 not to assent to the bill, but reserve the same for the consideration
 of the President.
15
 16. Counsel submitted that a law which curtails powers of the
 High Court may be validated by Presidential assent.  The State
 Legislature can restrict the appellate power of the High Court by
 providing for direct appeals to the Supreme Court.
 17. Counsel argued that a comparative reading of Articles 138(2)
 and Article 200 show that the State can make a law conferring
 appellate jurisdiction on the Supreme Court in the following two
 conditions:
 (i) 
When Government of India and Government of any
 State agree to confer jurisdiction and power on the
 Supreme Court [Article 138(2)];
 (ii) 
When the President assents to the Bill forwarded
 by the Governor of the State [second proviso to Article
 200]
 18. Learned Counsel submitted that in this case, the conditions
 of Article 138(2) and the Second proviso to Article 200 have both
 been complied with. The President has, on reference by the
 Governor, assented to the Bill, which has resulted in a new
 enactment. 
19. Learned Counsel argued that, as per Article 74 of the
 Constitution, the President is to act as per the aid and advice of
 the Council of Ministers.  To strengthen his argument that the
 President cannot act independently, but can only act on the aid
 and advice of his Council of Ministers,  Counsel cited Samsher
 Singh vs. the State of Punjab and Anr. reported in AIR 1974
SC 2192: (1974) 2 SCC 831. 
16
 20. According to Counsel, assent by the President, on the aid and
 advice of the Council of Ministers, tantamounts to compliance with
 the conditions in Article 138(2) of the Constitution, as Presidential
 assent on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers, means
 agreement between the State Government and the Government of
 India to confer appellate jurisdiction and power to the Supreme
 Court in relation to orders of the Rent Control Tribunal. 
21. Counsel also emphasized on the difference in the language
 of Article 138 (1) and Article 138(2) and in particular the use of the
 expression, ‘Government of India’ in Article 138(2) as against the
 expression ‘Parliament’ in Article 138(1), to argue that the
 Government of India and the Government of any State may by
 special agreement confer further jurisdiction and powers to the
 Supreme Court, for which no statutory enactment of Parliament is
 necessary.  The advice of the Council of Ministers to the President
 of India, to assent to a State enactment evinces an agreement
 between the Government of India and the State Government in
 that regard.
 22. 
Counsel has also cited Puthiyadath Jayamathy Avva and
 Ors. vs. K.J. Naga Kumar and Ors. reported in AIR 2001 KER
 38.  The part of the judgment cited is extracted hereinbelow:-  
“...if the President assents to a State law which has been
17
 reserved for consideration under Article 200, it will prevail
 notwithstanding its repugnancy to an earlier law of the
 Union.  Thus, even if there is repugnancy, the law made
 by the Legislature of the State, if it was reserved for
 consideration of the President and has received his
 assent, will prevail in the State. Thus, from the Act XXX of
 1976, it can be seen that it was reserved for the
 consideration of the President and the President has given
 his assent on 10-8-1976.  Therefore, the argument of the
 learned Counsel for the appellants that the State
 enactment cannot override the Central enactment cannot
 be accepted as correct...”
 23. Counsel finally argued that it was settled law that in case of
 any inconsistency between the provisions of the Constitution and
 the provisions of any statutory enactment, the various articles of
 the Constitution and the various provisions of the statutory
 enactments should be harmoniously construed.  
24. Elaborating on his argument, Counsel pointed out that the
 expression “derogate from the powers of the High Court as to
 endanger the position which that Court by this Constitution, is
 designed to fill” in the last part of the second proviso to Article 200
 alludes to derogation of the inherent powers of the High Court
 under Articles 226 and Article 227 of the Constitution of India.  The
 Rent Control Act does not touch the power of the High Courts, of
 judicial review under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
 India.  Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act only confers appellate
 jurisdiction on the Supreme Court of India, which is not prohibited
 or barred under the Constitution. 
18
 25. Counsel emphatically reiterated his argument that the Rent
 Control Act has not conferred any jurisdiction on the Supreme
 Court, which it did not earlier possess. Article 136 provides for
 appeal to the Supreme Court against any order of any 
Court or Tribunal.  Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act is only in
 consonance with or may be an extension of the powers of the
 Supreme Court under Article 136.  
26. The learned Attorney General for India, on the other hand,
 submitted that Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act which
 provides for direct appeal to the Supreme Court of India, from any
 order passed by the Rent Control Tribunal, set up under the Rent
 Control Act, is unconstitutional, the same being beyond the
 legislative competence of the State Legislature of Chhattisgarh.
 27. The learned Attorney General submitted that lack of
 legislative competence of the Chhattisgarh State Legislature, to
 enact Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act, is evident from a mere
 reading of three entries in the Seventh Schedule of the
 Constitution of India, that is, Entry 77 of List 1 (Union List), Entry
 65 of List II (State List) and Entry 46 of List III (Concurrent List).
 28. The learned Attorney General submitted that it would be
 seen that Entry 77 of List I, read with Article 146(1) of the
 Constitution, confers on Parliament the exclusive jurisdiction to
 legislate with regard to the jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme
19
 Court of India. Furthermore, Entry 65 of List II, as well as Entry 46
 of List III, prohibit a State Legislature from legislating in regard to
 the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India.
 29. The learned Attorney General further submitted that the
 clear scheme and architecture of these entries is buttressed by
 other provisions in the Constitution, which confer only on
 Parliament the competence to legislate in regard to the Supreme
 Court of India. These provisions include Articles 124(1), 125(1),
 125(2), 133(3), 134(2), 135(1), 137, 138(1), 138(2), 139, 140,
 145(1), 262 and 348(1).
 30. The learned Attorney General submitted that, the fact that
 the Rent Control Act had been reserved for the assent of the
 President of India, under Article 200 of the Constitution, and had
 received the assent of the President in terms of Article 201, would
 not in any manner alter the extent of legislative competence of the
 State Legislature.  This is for the reason that, neither the Governor
 of any State, nor the President of India, may confer legislative
 competence on any legislative body,  whether Parliament or a
 State Legislature, contrary to the provisions of the Constitution.  
31. The learned Attorney General argued that the distribution of
 legislative powers between Parliament and the State Legislatures
 is governed by Chapter I of Part XI of the Constitution, including
 Articles 246 and 248, along with the three Lists contained in the
20
 Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  Any question of legislative
 competence would have to be decided finally by this Court, in
 accordance with these provisions of the Constitution.
 32. The learned Attorney General referred to the decision of this
 Court in K.K. Poonacha vs. State of Karnataka and Ors.
 reported in (2010) 9 SCC 671, which interprets, inter alia, Article
 31(3) of the Constitution, as it stood prior to its repeal.  Article 31
 pertained to the compulsory acquisition of property, and Clause (3)
 thereof stated that “No such law as stated in Clause (2) made by
 the Legislature of a State shall have effect unless such law, having
 been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received
 his assent”.  In K.K. Poonacha (supra), this Court opined:
“What was implicit in the language of Article 31(3) was
 that the particular law was within the legislative
 competence of the State and such law did not violate the
 provisions contained in Part III or any other provision of
 the Constitution.  The assent given by the President in
 terms of Article 31(3) of the Constitution to a law enacted
 by the legislature of a State did not mean that the
 particular enactment acquired immunity from challenge
 even though the same was not within the legislative
 competence of the State or was otherwise violative of any
 constitutional provision.”
 33. The learned Attorney General submitted, and rightly, that the
 observations of this Court in K.K. Poonacha (supra) squarely
 apply to the grant of assent by the President of India under Article
 201 of the Constitution.
21
 34. The learned Attorney General submitted that it is worth
 noting that the Governor of a State may reserve a Bill for the
 consideration of the President of India for various reasons,
 including inconsistency with a parliamentary statute, impact of the
 statute on relations with other states, etc.  In certain situations,
 the Governor is bound to reserve a Bill for the consideration of the
 President, including matters covered by the second proviso to
 Article 200, i.e. a Bill, which in the opinion of the Governor would
 “so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the
 position which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill”.
 This is consistent with the role and duty of the Governor of a State,
 and the President of India, who, like the King of England will still
 have the right “to be consulted, to encourage and to warn”, as
 explained in Shamsher Singh (supra).  However, the grant of
 assent by the Governor, or by the President, would not in any
 manner affect or control the issue of legislative competence of the
 legislature of the State.
 35. The learned Attorney General also referred to a recent
 judgment of a Division Bench of this Court rendered on 15.10.2019
 in Civil Appeal No.5153 of 2019 (H.S. Yadav vs. Shakuntala
 Devi Parakh) striking down Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act
 as ultra vires  the Constitution and beyond the scope of the powers
 of the State Legislature. 
22
 36. Parliament and the State Legislatures derive their power to
 make laws from Article 245(1) of the Constitution of India and such
 power is subject to and/or limited by the provisions of the
 Constitution.   While Parliament can make law for the whole or any
 part of the territory of India, the State Legislature can only make
 laws  for the State or any part thereof, subject to the restrictions in
 the Constitution of India. 
37. Article 246, which distributes legislative powers between the
 Union Legislature and the State Legislature, confers exclusive
 power to Parliament to make laws in respect of the matters
 specified in List I in the Seventh Schedule, that is, the Union List.
 The Union Parliament also has, subject to Clause (3) of  Article 246,
 the power to make laws with respect to any of the  matters
 enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule, that is, the
 Concurrent List.
 38. While Parliament has exclusive power under Article 246(1) of
 the Constitution to make laws with respect to the matters
 enumerated in the Union List, the State Legislature has exclusive
 power to make laws with respect to matters enumerated in the
 State List,  subject to Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 246.  Along with
 the Union Legislature, the State Legislature is also competent to
 enact laws in respect of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent
 List, subject to the provisions of Article 246(1). 
23
 39. The entries in the three lists, relevant to the issues referred
 to this Bench, that is, Entry 77 of the Union List,  Entries 18 and 65
 of the State List and Entry 46 of the Concurrent List are set out
 hereinbelow for convenience:
“List I- Union List 
“77. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of
 the Supreme Court (including contempt of such Court),
 and the fees taken therein; persons entitled to practise
 before the Supreme Court.” 
List II – State List 
“18. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land
 tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and
 the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of
 agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural
 loans; colonization.
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 65. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the
 Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in this
 List.”
 List III - Concurrent List 
46. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the
 Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in this
 List.”
 40. The Supreme Court has been established under Article 124
 of the Constitution of India and derives its jurisdiction and powers
 from Articles 131 to 145 thereof.   There is no provision in the
 Constitution which provides for direct appeal to the Supreme
 Court, from an order of a Tribunal constituted under any law
 enacted by a State Legislature.
24
 41. Article 262(2) of the Indian Constitution which enables
 Parliament to enact law abrogating the power of the Supreme
 Court to adjudicate the disputes referred to in Article 262(1), and
 Article 348 of the Constitution of India in respect of parliamentary
 enactments relating to the language of the Supreme Court and the
 High Courts, referred to by the Learned Attorney General for India,
 are not really of relevance to the issue referred to this Bench for
 determination, except to demonstrate that all matters pertaining
 to the Supreme Court are exclusively within the legislative domain
 of Union Parliament.
 42. Entry 18 of the State List enables the State Legislature to
 enact law with respect to land, including rights in and over land,
 land tenures including relation of landlord and tenant and the
 collection of rent.   The State Legislature being clothed with power
 to enact law in respect of land tenures, including the relation of
 landlord and tenant and the collection of rent, it had legislative
 competence to enact the Rent Control Act, in so far as the same
 regulates the relationship of landlord and tenant and the collection
 of rent.
 43. Article 323B inserted in the Constitution of India, with effect
 from 3rd January, 1977, by the Constitution (Forty Second
 Amendment) Act 1976 empowers the appropriate legislature to
 enact law providing for adjudication and/or trial by Tribunals, of
 any disputes, offences or complaints with respect to all or any of
the matters in Clause (2) of the said Article.
 25
 44. Clause (2) of Article 323B was amended by the Constitution
 (Seventy fifth Amendment) Act, with effect from 15th May, 1994 to
 inter alia insert clause (h), thereby enabling the appropriate
 legislature to make law, providing for adjudication or trial by
 Tribunals of any disputes, complaints or offences, in respect of
 issues relating to tenancy and rent, including regulation and
 control of rent.
 45. The Explanation appended to Section 323B of the
 Constitution explains “appropriate legislature” in Article 323B to
 mean Parliament, or as the case may be, a State Legislature,
 competent to make laws with respect to the matter in accordance
 with the provisions of Part XI of the Constitution of India, which
 includes Articles 245 and 246.
 46. On a conjoint reading of Article 323B and Articles 245 and
 246 of the Constitution of India with Entry 18 of the State List in
 the Seventh Schedule, there can be no doubt that the State
 Legislature was competent to enact law to provide for adjudication
 and trial of all disputes, complaints and offences relating to
 tenancy and rent, by a Tribunal.
 47. The Chhattisgarh State Legislature was thus competent to
 enact the Rent Control Act, to the extent that it provides for the
 adjudication of original disputes relating to tenancy and rent by the
26
 Rent Controller, and creates a Tribunal to decide appeals from
 orders of the Rent Controller, but subject to the exception, as
 discussed hereafter. 
48. When the question of vires of any enactment is considered, it
 is to be seen, whether looking at the legislation as a whole, it can
 be said to be a legislation, substantially with respect to any of the
 matters, with regard to which the Legislature is competent to
 legislate, under any specific Article of the Constitution, or any of
 the Entries in the relevant List in the Seventh Schedule thereto.
 Once it is held that it is so, the legislative power conferred by that
 Entry is to extend to all ancillary matters, which may fairly and
 reasonably be said to be comprehended in that arena, as held by
 the Federal Court in United Provinces vs. Atika Begum
 reported in AIR 1941 FC 16 (25) and reiterated by this Court in
 numerous judgments.   
49. Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act, providing for direct
 appeal to the Supreme Court from orders passed by the Rent
 Control Tribunal, is not ancillary or incidental to the power of the
 Chhattisgarh State Legislature to enact a Rent Control Act, which
 provides for appellate adjudication of appeals relating to tenancy
 and rent by a Tribunal.  In enacting Section 13(2) of the Rent
 Control Act, the Chhattisgarh State Legislature has overtly
 transgressed the limits of its legislative power, as reiterated and
 discussed hereinafter.
27
 50. While the widest amplitude should be given to the language
 used in one entry, every attempt has to be made to harmonize its
 contents with those of other Entries, so that the latter may not be
 rendered nugatory.   
51. As observed above, both the Union legislature and the State
 Legislature derive their power to legislate from Article 245 of the
 Constitution of India.  It is axiomatic that the legislature of a State
 may only make laws for the whole or any part of the State, while
 Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the
 territory of India.  There is no provision in the Constitution which
 saves State laws with extra-territorial operation, similar to Article
 245(2) which expressly saves Union laws with extra-territorial
 operation, enacted by Parliament.  
The Chhattisgarh State
 Legislature, thus, patently lacks competence to enact any law
 which affects the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, outside the
 State of Chhattisgarh.
 52. Entry 18 of the State List only enables the State Legislature
 to legislate with regard to landlord tenant relationship, collection of
 rents etc.  This Entry does not enable the State Legislature to
 circumvent  Entry 64 of the State List or Entry 46 of the Concurrent
 List which enable the State Legislature to enact laws with respect
 to the jurisdiction and powers of Courts, except the Supreme
 Court, or to render otiose,  Entry 77 of the Union List, which
 expressly confers law making power in respect of the jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court, exclusively to Parliament. 
28
 53. Entry 18 of the State List,  which only enables the State
 Legislature to legislate with regard to land, land tenures, landlord
 tenant relationship, collection of rents etc. does not enable the
 State Legislature to enact law conferring appellate jurisdiction to
 the Supreme Court in respect of orders passed by an Appellate
 Rent Control Tribunal,  constituted under a state law. 
54. 
In view of Entry 77 of the Union List, only Parliament has the
 legislative competence to legislate with respect to the constitution,
 organization, jurisdiction or powers of the Supreme Court.  Entry
 64 of the State List and Entry 46 of the Concurrent List enable the
 State Legislature to enact law with respect to the jurisdiction and
 powers of Courts except the Supreme Court.   In other words, the
 said Entries expressly debar the State Legislature from legislating
 with respect to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
 55. Article 323B (3)(d) provides that a law made under Article
 323B (1) may exclude the jurisdiction of all courts except the
 jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 136, with respect to
 all or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said
 tribunals.  Article 323B does not enable a State Legislature to
 expand the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court by enacting a
 provision for further statutory appeal to the Supreme Court from
 an order of an Appellate Tribunal. 
29
 56. The contention of Counsel for the appellant that Section
 13(2) of the Rent Control Act does not confer on the Supreme
 Court, jurisdiction it did not already possess, but is only incidental
 to and/or extension of its power under Article 136, is not
 sustainable in law. 
57. Under Article 136 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court
 does not act as a regular court of appeal.  The power of the
 Supreme Court under Article 136 is not to be confused with the
 appellate power ordinarily exercised by appellate courts and
 Tribunals under specific statutes.
 58. Article 136 does not confer a right of appeal on any party,
 but confers a discretionary power on the Supreme Court to
 interfere in appropriate cases.  This power can be exercised in
 spite of other provisions for appeal contained in the Constitution,
 or any other law, as  held in N. Natarajan vs. B. K. Subba Rao
 reported in (2003) 2 SCC 76.  
59. Conclusiveness or finality given by a statute to decision of a
 Court or Tribunal, cannot deter the Supreme Court from exercising
 this jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution as held by a
 Constitution Bench of this Court, inter alia, in Dhakeshwari
 Cotton Mills Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, West
 Bengal reported in AIR 1955 SC 65 and reiterated in numerous
 other decisions. appellate jurisdiction is not exercised when a
statute gives finality to a decision of the Court or Tribunal.  
30
 60. Under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, the Supreme
 Court entertains appeals by special leave, where substantial
 questions of law or questions of public importance are involved.
 Where there is any uncertainty in the law, the Supreme Court, in
 its discretion, settles the law.  The Supreme Court does not
 ordinarily interfere with concurrent findings of fact under Article
 136.  If the concurrent findings are based on accepted oral or
 documentary evidence, there is no interference under Article 136
 of the Constitution.
 61. While exercising power under Article 136 of the Constitution,
 the Supreme Court does not re-appreciate evidence which has
 been appreciated by the Trial Court and the High Courts, unless
 extraordinary circumstances exist.  It is only where the High Court
 has completely missed the real point requiring adjudication or has
 missed or ignored the relevant material, would the Supreme Court
 be justified in getting into evidence for the purpose of preventing
 grave injustice to a party.  
62. An appeal, on the other hand, is a continuation of the
 original proceedings.  Where there is a statutory appeal from an
 appellate order of the Tribunal, the appellate court is obliged to
 rehear the case,  re-appreciate and re-analyze the evidence on
 record, adjudicate the correctness of the order impugned and
31
 correct errors both of fact and of law, that the Tribunal may have
 made. 
63.  
Article 200 of the Constitution relating to the passage of Bills
 except money Bills, requires Bills passed by the Legislative
 Assembly of a State, or in case of a State having a Legislative
 Council, a bill passed by both the houses of the Legislature of the
 State, to be presented to the Governor for assent. Such Bills
 become law on receipt of assent of the Governor.
 64. The second proviso to Article 200 of the Constitution
 mandates the Governor not to assent, but reserve for the
 consideration of the President, any Bill, which in the    opinion    of
 the   Governor   would,   if  it became law, so derogate from the
 powers of the High Court, as to endanger the position which that
 Court is, by the Constitution, designed to fill.
 65. Presidential assent is imperative in the case of law enacted
 by a State Legislature, which would derogate from the powers of
 the High Court, as to endanger the position which that Court is, by
 the Constitution, designed to fill. 
66. Entry 65 of the State List read with Entry 46 of the
 Concurrent List, as stated above, enables the State Legislature to
 enact law with respect to the jurisdiction and powers of all Courts,
 except the Supreme Court with respect to any of the matters in
 those lists. The State Legislature may, therefore, be competent to
32
 enact law which affects the jurisdiction and powers of the High
 Court, except   the jurisdiction and powers of the High Court under
 Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, held by a Constitution
 Bench of  this Court, to be an inviolable basic feature of the
 Constitution in L Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India and
 others reported in AIR 1997 SC 1125.
 67. Counsel for the appellant is right in arguing that  L Chandra
 Kumar (supra) pertains to the power of the High Court under
 Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.  The State
 Legislature has the power to enact law which abridges the powers
 of the High Court, except those powers, which constitute an
 inviolable basic feature of the Constitution, such as the powers of
 the High Court under Articles 226 and 227. 
 68. The second proviso to Article 200, of the Constitution
 prohibits the Governor from assenting to a Bill, which in the
 opinion of the Governor would, if it became law, so derogate from
 the powers of the High Court, as to endanger the position which
 the High Court is, by the Constitution of India, design to fill.  The
 Governor is obliged to reserve such bill for the consideration of the
 President. 
69. The second proviso to Article 200 is not attracted in the case
 of Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act, since it does not derogate
 from any power of the High Court.  It is well settled that there is no
33
 inherent right of appeal.  Right of appeal is conferred by Statute. A
 Statute is not invalid only because it has no provision of appeal to
 the High Court.  
70. For the purpose of this reference, it is not necessary for us to
 go into the question of which curtailments of the power of the High
 Court would threaten the position which the High Court is required
 by the Constitution to fill.
 71. The amplitude of power conferred by Clauses 1 and 2 of
 Article 246, makes the Parliament competent to make a law
 enlarging the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court with respect to any
 of the matters enumerated in List I and III, even though such
 enlargement may not be contemplated  by the various Articles of
 Chapter IV of Part V of the Constitution.   
72. By virtue of the power conferred by Article 248 of the
 Constitution of India, the Parliament has, subject to Article 246 A of
 the Constitution, exclusive power to make any law  with respect to
 any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.
 The residuary power of legislation thus rests with Parliament. 
73. 
Suffice it to note that in view of Entry 65 of the State List
 and Entry 46 of the Concurrent List,  the State Legislature can
 enact law which affects the jurisdiction of all Courts, except  the
 Supreme Court.  In other words it can enact law which affects the
 jurisdiction of the High Court, except under Articles 226 and 227,
34
 but it cannot enact law which touches the jurisdiction of the
 Supreme Court. The Rent Control Tribunal having been established
 under Article 323B of the Constitution, as observed above, the
 diminution, if any, of the jurisdiction of the High Court, except
 under Article 226 and 227, would be saved by Article 323B(3)(d) of
 the Constitution, but not the provision for statutory appeal to the
 Supreme Court. 
74. The argument of Learned Counsel for the appellant that
 Article 138(1) and/or Entry 77 of the Union List only takes within its
 ambit, the Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, and not its
 appellate jurisdiction, is fallacious and without basis.  There is no
 reason to restrict the scope of Article 138(1) or of Entry 77 of the
 Union List in the Schedule to the Constitution artificially.  Entry 77
 of the Union List, going by its plain meaning, as also Article 138(1)
 should include both Original and appellate jurisdiction of the
 Supreme Court.   
75. The proposition urged by Counsel for the appellant that when
 a State Law gets the assent of the President of India, that law
 prevails in the States, notwithstanding repugnancy with an earlier
 Union law, is unexceptionable.  
76. However, Presidential assent makes no difference in case of
 legislative incompetence.  Presidential assent cannot and does not
 validate an enactment in excess of the legislative powers of the
35
 State Legislature, nor validate a statutory provision, which would
 render express provisions of the Constitution otiose. Presidential
 assent cures repugnancy with an earlier Central Statute, provided
 the State Legislature is otherwise competent to enact the Statute.
 77. In view of our finding that Presidential assent would not
 validate a statutory provision which the legislature was
 incompetent to enact,  we need not go into the question of
 whether the President had occasion to consider the repugnancy of
 Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act with the provisions of the
 Constitution, including in particular, Entry 65 of the State List and
 Entry 46 of the Concurrent List, which expressly exclude from the
 State Legislature, the competence and/or power to enact law
 affecting the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.  
78. A law made under Article 323B (1) of the Constitution may
 exclude the jurisdiction of all Courts except the jurisdiction of the
 Supreme Court under Article 136 with respect to the matters
 falling within the jurisdiction of the said Tribunals.  However, as
 observed above, Article 323B (2) (d) or any other provision of the
 Constitution does not enable the State Legislature to enact law
 which provides for statutory appeals to the Supreme Court.
 79. Section 13(2) of the Rent Control Act purports to confer a
 right of statutory Second Appeal  to the Supreme Court. Even in
 case of concurrent findings of the Rent Controller and Rent Control
36
 Tribunal, where no serious question of law were involved, an
 appeal would have to be entertained and decided.  Such a
 provision which mandates the Supreme Court to consider an
 appeal is clearly beyond the legislative competence of the State
 Legislature, as argued by the learned Attorney General. Article 200
 as observed above does not and cannot validate an ultra vires
 enactment, which the concerned Legislature lacked competence to
 enact.
 80. Article 138 (2) of the Constitution provides that the Supreme
 Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers with respect
 to any matter as the Government of India and the Government of
 any State may by special agreement confer, if Parliament by law
 provides for the exercise of such jurisdiction and powers by the
 Supreme Court.
 81. It is difficult to accept the submission of Counsel appearing
 on behalf of the appellant, that reservation of a Bill for Presidential
 assent and consequential grant of Presidential assent, tantamounts
 to special agreement between the Government of India and the
 State Government, because the President acts on the aid and
 advice of the Council of Ministers.
 82. A special agreement, in our considered view means, an
 independent agreement arrived at between the Government of
 India and the Government of a State through deliberations and
37
 negotiations and not just an approval of legislation by the
 President on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers.   
83. In any case, the Supreme Court may exercise further
 jurisdiction pursuant to a special agreement between the
 Government of India and the State Government on any particular
 issue, provided Parliament by law provides for the exercise of such
 jurisdiction  and powers by the Supreme Court.   Parliament has
 not enacted any such law enabling the Supreme Court to exercise
 jurisdiction in respect of a subject matter agreed upon between the
 Government of India and the State Government. Article 138(2) is
 not attracted.
 84. We are in full agreement with the judgment of this Court in
 H. S. Yadav (supra)  declaring Section 13(2) of the Rent Control
 Act ultra vires  the Constitution and beyond the scope of the power
 of the State legislature. 
85. It is true, that in L. Chandra Kumar  (supra) this Court held
 that Tribunals constituted under Articles 323A and 323B of the
 Constitution were subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts,
 within whose jurisdiction they were located, as noted by this Court
 in H.S Yadav (supra).   
86. The power of superintendence conferred by Article 227 is,
 however, supervisory and not appellate. It is settled law that this
 power of judicial superintendence must be exercised sparingly,  to
38
 keep subordinate courts and tribunals within the limits of their
 authority.   
When a Tribunal has acted within its jurisdiction, the
 High Court does not interfere in exercise of its extraordinary writ
 jurisdiction unless there is  grave miscarriage of justice or flagrant
 violation of law.  Jurisdiction under Article 227 cannot be exercised
 “in the cloak of an appeal in disguise”.  
87. In exercise of its extraordinary power of superintendence
 and/or judicial review under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution
 of India, the High Courts restrict interference to cases of patent
 error of law which go to the root of the decision; perversity;
 arbitrariness and/or unreasonableness; violation of principles of
 natural justice, lack of jurisdiction and usurpation of powers.  The
 High Court does not re-assess or re-analyze the evidence and/or
 materials on record.  Whether the High Court would exercise its
 writ jurisdiction to test a decision of the Rent Control Tribunal
 would depend on the facts and circumstances of the case. The writ
 jurisdiction of the High Court cannot be converted into an
 alternative appellate forum, just because there is no other
 provision of appeal in the eye of law.  
88. In L Chandrakumar (supra) the Supreme Court in effect
 held that the power of the High Court under Article 226/227 of the
 Constitution, being an inviolable basic feature of the Constitution
 such power cannot be abrogated by statutory enactment or for
 that matter even by constitutional amendment. L Chandrakumar
39
 (supra) cannot be construed to enlarge the jurisdiction of the High
 Court under Article 226 and 227, to enable it to exercise appellate
 powers. 
89. For the reasons discussed above, we hold that the State
 Legislature lacked legislative competence to enact Section 13(2) of
 the Rent Control Act.   We, therefore, declare Section 13(2) of the
 Rent Control Act ultra vires the Constitution of India,  null and void
 and of no effect.
 NEW DELHI;
 DECEMBER 10, 2019
 ……………………………..J
 [ARUN MISHRA]
 ....…............................J.
 [INDIRA BANERJEE]
 …..………………………...J
 [VINEET SARAN]
 …………...………………..J.
 [M.R. SHAH]
 ……..……………………...J.
 [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]