1

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2003 OF 2012
RITESH SINHA

… APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS

STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.

… RESPONDENT(S)

WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1318 OF 2013
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1187 OF 2019
[Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.9671 of 2017]
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1188 OF 2019
[Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.1048 of 2018]
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1189 OF 2019
[Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.2225 of 2018]
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1190 OF 2019
[Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.3272 of 2018]
JUDGMENT
RANJAN GOGOI, CJI.
1.

Leave granted in Special Leave Petition (Criminal) Nos.

Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2019.08.02
16:03:27 IST
Reason:

9671 of 2017, 1048 of 2018, 2225 of 2018 and 3272 of 2018.

2

2.

Criminal Appeal No.2003 of 2012.
Facts:
On 7th December, 2009 the In-charge of the Electronics

Cell of Sadar Bazar Police Station located in the district of
Saharanpur of the State of Uttar Pradesh lodged a First
Information Report (“FIR” for short) alleging that one Dhoom
Singh in association with the appellant – Ritesh Sinha, was
engaged in collection of monies from different people on the
promise of jobs in the Police. Dhoom Singh was arrested and
one mobile phone was seized from him.

The Investigating

Authority wanted to verify whether the recorded conversation
in the mobile phone was between Dhoom Singh and the
appellant – Ritesh Sinha. They, therefore, needed the voice
sample of the appellant and accordingly filed an application
before the learned jurisdictional Chief Judicial Magistrate
(“CJM” for short) praying for summoning the appellant to the
Court for recording his voice sample.
3.

The learned CJM, Saharanpur by order dated 8th

January, 2010 issued summons to the appellant to appear
before the Investigating Officer and to give his voice sample.

3

This order of the learned CJM was challenged before the High
Court of Allahabad under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as “Cr.P.C.”). The High
Court having negatived the challenge made by the appellant
by its order dated 9th July, 2010, the present appeal has been
filed.
4.

The appeal was heard and disposed of by a split

verdict of a two Judge Bench of this Court requiring the
present reference.
5.

Two principal questions arose for determination of the

appeal which have been set out in the order of Justice Ranjana
Prakash Desai dated 7th December, 2012 in the following
terms.
“(1) Whether Article 20(3) of the Constitution of
India, which protects a person accused of an
offence from being compelled to be a witness
against himself, extends to protecting such an
accused from being compelled to give his voice
sample during the course of investigation into
an offence?
(2) Assuming that there is no violation of Article
20(3) of the Constitution of India, whether in the
absence of any provision in the Code, can a
Magistrate authorize the investigating agency to
record the voice sample of the person accused
of an offence?”

4

6.

While the first question was answered in the negative by

both the learned Judges (Justice Ranjana Prakash Desai and
Justice Aftab Alam) following the ratio of the law laid down in
State of Bombay vs.Kathi Kalu Oghad1, difference of
opinion has occurred insofar as second question is concerned.
7.

Justice Desai took the view that voice sample can be

included in the phrase “such other tests” appearing in
Explanation (a) to Section 53 Cr.P.C. by applying the doctrine
of ejusdem generis and, therefore, the Magistrate would have
an implied power under Section 53 Cr.P.C. to pass an order
permitting taking of voice sample in the aid of criminal
investigation.
8.

On the other hand, Justice Aftab Alam took the view

that compulsion on an accused to give his/her voice sample
must be authorized on the basis of a law passed by the
Legislature instead of a process of judicial interpretation. In
this regard, the learned judge (Aftab Alam, J.) also took note
of the amendments in Sections 53, 53A and 311-A of the
Cr.P.C. by Act No.25 of 2005 introduced with effect from 23rd

1

A.I.R. 1961 SC 1808

5

June, 2006 which amendments did not bring, within the fold
of the aforesaid provisions of the Cr.P.C., any power in the trial
Court to compel an accused to give sample of his/her voice for
the purpose of investigation of a criminal charge.
9.

Despite unanimity amongst the learned Judges hearing

the appeal on the first question on which the learned counsel
for the appellant has also not laid much stress it would be
appropriate to make the discussions complete to answer the
question on the strength of the test laid down by this Court in
State of Bombay vs.Kathi Kalu Oghad (supra). Speaking on
behalf of the majority the then learned Chief Justice B.P.
Sinha was of the view that the prohibition contemplated by the
constitutional provision contained in Article 20(3) would come
in only in cases of testimony of an accused which are selfincriminatory or of a character which has the tendency of
incriminating the accused himself. The issue in the case was
with regard to specimen writings taken from the accused for
comparison with other writings in order to determine the
culpability of the accused and whether such a course of action
was prohibited under Article 20(3) of the Constitution.

The

6

following observations of the then Chief Justice B.P. Sinha
would be apt for recollection as the same conclusively
determines the first question arising. The same, therefore, is
extracted below:
“(11)……….It is well-established that cl. (3) of
Art. 20 is directed against self-incrimination by
an accused person. Self-Incrimination must
mean conveying information based upon the
personal knowledge of the person giving the
information and cannot include merely the
mechanical process of producing documents in
court which may throw a light on any of the
points in controversy, but which do not contain
any statement of the accused based on his
personal knowledge……….

(12) In order that a testimony by an accused
person may be said to have been selfincriminatory, the compulsion of which
comes within the prohibition of the
constitutional provision, it must be of such
a character that by itself it should have the
tendency of incriminating the accused, if not
also of actually doing so. In other words, it
should be a statement which makes the case
against the accused person at least probable,
considered by itself. A specimen handwriting or
signature or finger impressions by themselves
are no testimony at all, being wholly innocuous,
because they are unchangeable; except, in rare
cases where the ridges of the fingers or the style
of writing have been tampered with. They are
only materials for comparison in order to
lend assurance to the Court that its
inference based on other pieces of evidence

7

is reliable. They are neither oral nor
documentary evidence but belong to the third
category of material evidence which is outside
the limit of ‘testimony’.
[emphasis supplied]”

10.

We may now proceed to answer the second question,

namely, whether in the absence of any specific provision in the
Cr.P.C. would a Court be competent to authorize the
Investigating Agency to record the voice sample of a person
accused of an offence.

We are told that no authoritative

pronouncement of this Court has been rendered by this Court.
11.

Medical examination of an accused for the purposes of

effective investigation of a criminal charge has received a wider
meaning by the amendment to the Explanation to Section 53
Cr.P.C. made by Act No.25 of 2005 with effect from 23rd June,
2006. Similarly, Section 53A has been inserted by the same
Amending Act (No.25 of 2005) to provide for examination of a
person accused of rape. Likewise, by insertion of Section 311A by the same Amending Act (No.25 of 2005) a Magistrate has
been empowered to order any person, including an accused

8

person, to give specimen signatures or handwriting for the
purposes of any investigation or proceeding under the Cr.P.C.
12.

None of the said amendments specifically authorize or

empower a Magistrate to direct an accused person or any other
person to give his/her voice sample for the purposes of an
inquiry or investigation under the Code.

“Omission” of the

Legislature to specifically so provide has led the learned judge
(Justice Aftab Alam) on the two judge Bench to doubt as to
whether legislative wisdom was in favour of a specific
exclusion or omission so as to make a judicial exercise through
a process of interpretation impermissible.
13.

The Law Commission of India, in its 87th report dated

29th August, 1980, also had an occasion to deal with the
question

presently

confronting

the

Court.

The

Law

Commission examined the matter (almost four decades earlier)
in the context of the working of the provisions of the
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920. The view taken was that
a suitable legislation which could be in the form of an
amendment to Section 5 of the Identification of Prisoners Act,
1920 would be appropriate so as to specifically empower a

9

Judicial Magistrate to compel an accused person to give a
sample of his voice. The following extract from the 87th Report
of the Law Commission dated 29th August, 1980 would be
relevant.
“A voice print is a visual recording of voice. It
mainly depends on the position of “formants”.
These are concentrates of sound energy at a
given frequency. It is stated that their position
in the “frequency domain” is unique to each
speaker. Voice prints resemble finger prints, in
that each person has a distinctive voice with
characteristic features dictated by vocal cavities
and articulates.
Voice-print Identification seems to have a
number of practical uses. In England, in
November 1967, at the Winchester Magistrate’s
Court, a man was accused of making malicious
telephone calls. Voice-print Identification
(spectrograph) was used and the accused was
found guilty.”2
***

***

***

“Often, it becomes desirable to have an accused
person speak for the purposes of giving to the
police an opportunity to hear his voice and try
to identify it as that of the criminal offender. A
comparison may even be desired between the
voice of an accused person and the recorded
voice of a criminal which has been obtained by,
say, telephone tapping. To facilitate proof of the
crime the police may like that the accused
should be compelled to speak,- and even that
2

Paragraph 5.27, 87th Report of the Law Commission of India

10

his voice as recorded may be converted into a
“voice print”
……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………
However, if the accused refuses to furnish
such voice, there is no legal sanction for
compelling him to do so, and the use of force for
that purpose would be illegal.”3
***

***

***

“The scope of Section 5 needs to be expanded in
another aspect. The general power of
investigation given to the police under the
Criminal Procedure Code may not imply the
power to require the accused to furnish a
specimen of his voice. Cases in which the voice
of the accused was obtained for comparison
with the voice of the criminal offender are
known but the question whether the accused
can be compelled to do so does not seem to have
been debated so far in India
There is no specific statutory provision in
India which expressly gives power to a police
officer or a court to require an accused person
to furnish a specimen of his voice.”4

14.

Section 5 of the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920

coincidentally empowers the Magistrate to order/direct any

3

Paragraph 3.16, 87th Report of the Law Commission of India

4

Paragraph 5.26, 87th Report of the Law Commission of India

11

person to allow his measurements or photographs to be taken
for the purposes of any investigation or proceeding. It may be
significant to note that the amendments in the Cr.P.C., noticed
above,

could

very

well

have

been

a

sequel

to

the

recommendation of the Law Commission in its Report dated
29th August, 1980 though the said recommendation was in
slightly narrower terms i.e. in the context of Section 5 of the
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920. In this regard, it may
also be usefully noticed that though this Court in State of
Uttar Pradesh vs. Ram Babu Misra5 after holding that a
Judicial Magistrate has no power to direct an accused to give
his specimen writing for the purposes of investigation had
suggested to Parliament that a suitable legislation be made on
the analogy of Section 5 of the Identification of Prisoners Act,
1920 so as to invest a Magistrate with the power to issue
directions to any person including an accused person to give
specimen signatures and writings.

The consequential

amendment, instead, came by way of insertion of Section 311A in the Cr.P.C by the Code of Criminal Procedure

5

A.I.R. 1980 S.C. 791

12

(Amendment) Act, 2005 (Act No.25 of 2005) with effect from
23rd June, 2006.
15.

The legislative response in remaining silent or acting at

a “slow” pace can always be explained by legislative concerns
and considerations of care and caution. It is in the aforesaid
context and in the admitted absence of any clear statutory
provision that the question arising has to be answered which
is primarily one of the extent to which by a process of judicial
interpretation a clear gap in the statute should be filled up
pending a formal legislative exercise.

It is the aforesaid

question that we shall now turn to.
16.

“Procedure is the handmaid, not the mistress, of

justice and cannot be permitted to thwart the fact-finding
course in litigation”6. We would like to proceed in the matter
keeping the above view of this Court in the backdrop.

6

A.I.R. 1975 SC 349 [Vatal Nagaraj vs. R. Dayanand Sagar)

13

17.

A detailed reference to the facts of a case decided by this

Court in “Sushil Kumar Sen vs. State of Bihar”7 is deemed
appropriate.
The appellant in the above case was the owner of a plot
of land measuring about 3.30 acres located in the district of
Purnea in Bihar. The said parcel of land was acquired under
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The Land
Acquisition Officer by order/Award dated 12th October, 1957
awarded compensation to the appellant(s) therein at the rate
of Rs.14 per katha. The learned Additional District Judge,
Purnea while hearing the reference under Section 18 of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 enhanced the compensation to
Rs.200 per katha. This was by order dated 18th August, 1961.
The State of Bihar sought a review of the aforesaid order dated
18th August, 1961 which was allowed on 26th September, 1961
scaling down the compensation to Rs.75 per katha.

Not

satisfied, the State of Bihar preferred an appeal before the High
Court against the order dated 26th September, 1961 passed in
the review application granting compensation at the rate of

7

(1975) 1 SCC 774

14

Rs.75 per katha. No appeal was, however, filed by the State of
Bihar against the original order dated 18th August, 1961
awarding compensation at the rate of Rs.200 per katha. Cross
appeal(s) before the High Court against the order dated 26th
September, 1961 passed in the review application was filed by
the appellant – landowner.

The High Court by its order

dated 16th February, 1968 held the review application of the
State of Bihar, in which the order dated 26th September, 1961
was passed, to be not maintainable. However, the High Court
adjudicated the case on merits and awarded compensation to
the landowner(s) at the rate of Rs.75 per katha. Aggrieved, the
landowner – Sushil Kumar Sen approached this Court.
Justice K.K. Mathew who delivered the lead judgment in
the case took the view that the original decree/award of the
Reference Court dated 18th August, 1961 stood superseded by
the decree/award dated 26th September, 1961 passed in the
review application.

However, once the said decree/award

dated 26th September, 1961 was set aside in the cross appeal
filed by the landowner(s) the earlier decree/award dated 18th
August, 1961 stood revived. As there was no appeal against

15

the

said

decree/award

dated

18th

August,

1961

the

landowner(s) would be entitled to compensation in terms of the
said original decree/award dated 18th August, 1961.
Justice Krishna Iyer delivered a concurring opinion
agreeing with the aforesaid conclusions but expressing a
thought process which would be of significant relevance to the
issue in hand.

The position can be best explained by

extracting the following observations from the opinion
rendered by Justice Krishna Iyer in Sushil Kumar Sen vs.
State of Bihar (supra)
“I concur regretfully with the result reached by
the infallible logic of the law set out by my
learned Brother Mathew, J. The mortality of
justice at the hands of law troubles a Judge’s
conscience
and
points
an
angry
interrogation at the law reformer.
6. The processual law so dominates in
certain systems as to overpower substantive
rights and substantial justice. The humanist
rule that procedure should be the handmaid,
not the mistress, of legal justice compels
consideration of vesting a residuary power in
Judges to act ex debito justiciae where the
tragic sequel otherwise would be wholly
inequitable. In the present case, almost every
step a reasonable litigant could take was taken
by the State to challenge the extraordinary
increase in the rate of compensation awarded by
the civil court. And, by hindsight, one finds that
the very success, in the review application, and

16

at the appellate stage has proved a disaster to
the party. Maybe, Government might have
successfully attacked the increase awarded in
appeal, producing the additional evidence there.
But maybes have no place in the merciless
consequence of vital procedural flaws.
Parliament, I hope, will consider the wisdom of
making the Judge the ultimate guardian of
justice by a comprehensive, though guardedly
worded, provision where the hindrance to
rightful relief relates to infirmities, even serious,
sounding in procedural law. Justice is the goal
of jurisprudence — processual, as much as
substantive. While this appeal has to be
allowed, for reasons set out impeccably by
my learned brother, I must sound a
pessimistic note that it is too puritanical for
a legal system to sacrifice the end product of
equity and good conscience at the altar of
processual punctiliousness and it is not too
radical to avert a breakdown of obvious
justice by bending sharply, if need be, the
prescriptions of procedure. The wages of
procedural sin should never be the death of
rights.”
[Emphasis is ours]

18.

In the present case, the view that the law on the point

should emanate from the Legislature and not from the Court,
as expressed in the judgment of this Court from which the
reference has emanated is founded on two main reasons, viz.,
(i) the compulsion to give voice sample does in some way
involve an invasion of the rights of the individual and to bring
it within the ambit of the existing law would require more than

17

reasonable bending and stretching of the principles of
interpretation and (ii) if the legislature, even while making
amendments in the Criminal Procedure Code (Act No.25 of
2005), is oblivious and despite express reminders chooses not
to include voice sample either in the newly introduced
explanation to Section 53 or in Sections 53A and 311A of
CR.P.C., then it may even be contended that in the larger
scheme of things the legislature is able to see something which
perhaps the Court is missing.
19.

Insofar as the first reservation is concerned, the same

would stand dispelled by one of the earlier pronouncements of
this Court on the subject in State of Bombay vs.Kathi Kalu
Oghad (supra), relevant extracts of which judgment has
already been set out. The following views in the concurring
opinion of Justice K.C. Das Gupta in State of Bombay
vs.Kathi Kalu Oghad (supra) would further strengthen the
view of this Court to the contrary.
“(32) ………It has to be noticed that Article
20(3) of our Constitution does not say that
an accused person shall not be compelled to
be a witness. It says that such a person shall
not be compelled to be a witness against
himself. The question that arises therefore

18

is: Is an accused person furnishing evidence
against himself, when he gives his specimen
handwriting, or impressions of his fingers,
palm or foot? The answer to this must, in our
opinion, be in the negative.
(33) …….the evidence of specimen handwriting
or the impressions of the accused person’s
fingers, palm or foot, will incriminate him, only
if on comparison of these with certain other
handwritings or certain other impressions,
identity between the two sets is established. By
themselves,
these
impressions
or
the
handwritings do not incriminate the accused
person, or even tend to do so. That is why it
must be held that by giving these impressions
or specimen handwriting, the accused person
does not furnish evidence against himself. So,
when an accused person is compelled to give a
specimen handwriting or impressions of his
finger, palm or foot, it may be said that he has
been compelled to be a witness; it cannot
however be said that he has been compelled to
be a witness against himself.”
[Emphasis is ours]

20.

So far as the second basis for the view taken is

concerned, we have already expressed an opinion that what
may appear to be legislative inaction to fill in the gaps in the
Statute could be on account of justified legislative concern and
exercise of care and caution. However, when a yawning gap in
the Statute, in the considered view of the Court, calls for

19

temporary patchwork of filling up to make the Statute effective
and workable and to sub-serve societal interests a process of
judicial interpretation would become inevitable.
21.

The exercise of jurisdiction by Constitutional

Courts must be guided by contemporaneous realities/existing
realities on the ground. Judicial power should not be allowed
to be entrapped within inflexible parameters or guided by rigid
principles. True, the judicial function is not to legislate but in
a situation where the call of justice and that too of a large
number who are not parties to the lis before the Court,
demands expression of an opinion on a silent aspect of the
Statute, such void must be filled up not only on the principle
of ejusdem generis but on the principle of imminent necessity
with a call to the Legislature to act promptly in the matter.
22.

Illustratively, we may take the decision of this

Court in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board vs. A
Rajappa and others8 .

A lone voice of dissent against

expansion of the frontiers of judicial interpretation to fill in
gaps in the Statute enunciated by Lord Denning, L.J, in

8

(1978) 2 SCC 213

20

Seaford Court Estates Ltd. vs.Asher9 though did not find
immediate favour of the learned Judge’s contemporaries was
acknowledged to have carried within itself the vision and the
perception of the future. Coincidentally, the view enunciated
by Lord Justice Denning in Seaford Court Estates Ltd.
vs.Asher (supra) of ironing of the creases in the legislation has
been approved by the Indian Supreme Court in the following
words of the then Chief Justice M.H. Beg:
“147. My learned Brother has relied on what
was considered in England a somewhat
unorthodox method of construction in Seaford
Court Estates Ltd. v. Asher [(1949) 2 ALL ER 155,
164] where Lord Denning, L.J., said:
“When a defect appears a Judge cannot
simply fold his hands and blame the
draftsman. He must set to work on the
constructive task of finding the intention
of Parliament — and then he must
supplement the written words so as to give
‘force and life’ to the intention of
legislature. A Judge should ask himself
the question how, if the makers of the Act
had themselves come across this ruck in
the texture of it, they would have
straightened it out? He must then do as
they would have done. A Judge must not
alter the material of which the Act is
woven, but he can and should iron out the
creases.”
When this case went up to the House of Lords it
appears that the Law Lords disapproved of the
9

(1949) 2 All. E.R. 155 (at 164)

21

bold effort of Lord Denning to make ambiguous
legislation more comprehensible. Lord Simonds
found it to be “a naked usurpation of the
legislative function under the thin disguise of
interpretation”. Lord Morton (with whom Lord
Goddard entirely agreed) observed: “These
heroics are out of place” and Lord Tucker said
“Your Lordships would be acting in a legislative
rather than a judicial capacity if the view put
forward by Denning, L.J., were to prevail.”
148. Perhaps, with the passage of time,
what may be described as the extension of a
method resembling the “arm-chair rule” in
the construction of wills. Judges can more
frankly step into the shoes of the legislature
where an enactment leaves its own
intentions in much too nebulous or
uncertain a state. In M. Pentiah v. Muddala
Veeramallappa [AIR 1961 SC 1107, 1115]
Sarkar, J., approved of the reasoning, set out
above, adopted by Lord Denning. And, I must
say that, in a case where the definition of
“industry” is left in the state in which we find it,
the situation perhaps calls for some judicial
heroics to cope with the difficulties raised.”
[Emphasis is ours]

23.
&

A similar view of Lord Justice Denning in Magor
St.

Mellons

Rural

District

Council

vs. Newport

Corporation10 would be equally apt to notice.
“we sit here to find out the intention of
Parliament and of ministers and carry it
10

(1951) 2 All.E.R. 1226

22

out, and we do this better by filling in the
gaps and making sense of the enactment
than by opening it up to destructive
analysis.”

24.

Would a judicial order compelling a person to give

a sample of his voice violate the fundamental right to privacy
under Article 20(3) of the Constitution, is the next question.
The issue is interesting and debatable but not having been
argued before us it will suffice to note that in view of the
opinion rendered by this Court in Modern Dental College and
Research Centre and others vs.State of Madhya Pradesh
and others11, Gobind vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and
another12 and the Nine Judge’s Bench of this Court in K.S.
Puttaswamy and another vs. Union of India and others13
the fundamental right to privacy cannot be construed as
absolute and but must bow down to compelling public
interest. We refrain from any further discussion and consider
it appropriate not to record any further observation on an
issue not specifically raised before us.

11

(2016) 7 SCC 353
(1975) 2 SCC 148
13
(2017) 10 SCC 1
12

23

25.

In

the

light

of

the

above

discussions,

we

unhesitatingly take the view that until explicit provisions are
engrafted in the Code of Criminal Procedure by Parliament, a
Judicial Magistrate must be conceded the power to order a
person to give a sample of his voice for the purpose of
investigation of a crime. Such power has to be conferred on a
Magistrate by a process of judicial interpretation and in
exercise of jurisdiction vested in this Court under Article 142
of the Constitution of India.

We order accordingly and

consequently dispose the appeals in terms of the above.

………………………..…..,CJI
[RANJAN GOGOI]
...……………………..…….,J.
[DEEPAK GUPTA]
………………………..…….,J.
[SANJIV KHANNA]
New Delhi;
August 02, 2019.

