CA 5308/2022
1
Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Civil Appeal No 5308 of 2022
(Arising out of SLP (C) No 7772 of 2021)
…Appellant

Deepika Singh

Versus

Central Administrative Tribunal and Others

…Respondents

JUDGMENT

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J
1.

Leave granted.

2.

This appeal arises from a judgment dated 16 March 2021 of a Division Bench of

the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.

Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.08.26
17:40:39 IST
Reason:

CA 5308/2022
2

3.

The appellant was, at the material time, working on the post of Nursing Officer in

the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research 1 at Chandigarh since
her appointment on 25 November 2005. On 18 February 2014, the appellant married
Amir Singh. The spouse of the appellant was married before his marriage to the
appellant, but his former wife passed away on 16 February 2013. From his first
marriage, he has two children, a male child born on 1 February 2001 and a female child
born on 3 March 2005. The appellant filed an application on 4 May 2015, requesting the
authorities at PGIMER to enter the names of the two children born from the first
marriage of her spouse in the official service record.
4.

The appellant had her first biological child on 4 June 2019 from her marriage. On

6 June 2019, she applied for maternity leave for the period from 27 June 2019 to 23
December 2019 in terms of Rule 43 of the Central Civil Services (Leave) Rules 1972. 2
The authorities at PGIMER sought a clarification on 3 July 2019 regarding the fact that
the spouse of the appellant had two surviving children from his first marriage. The
appellant submitted a detailed reply on 24 July 2019. The request of the appellant for
the grant of maternity leave was rejected on 3 September 2019 on the ground that she
had two surviving children and had availed of child care leave earlier for the two
children born from the first marriage of her spouse. Consequently, maternity leave for

1
2

“PGIMER”
“Rules of 1972”

CA 5308/2022
3

the child borne by her, considered as her third child, was found to be inadmissible in
terms of the Rules of 1972. By an office order dated 21 January 2020, her leave for the
period from 30 May 2019 to 3 June 2019; 4 June 2019 to 27 October 2019; 27 October
2019 to 6 November 2019; and 7 November 2019 to 31 November 2019 was treated as
earned leave, medical leave, half pay leave, and extraordinary leave respectively. The
period of extraordinary leave was not counted towards increments in the scale of Rs.
9300-34800 under FR-26(ii) of the Fundamental Rules, Volume-I.
5.

Aggrieved by the decisions dated 3 September 2019 and 21 January 2020 of the

administrative authorities at PGIMER, the appellant moved the Central Administrative
Tribunal3 at its Chandigarh Bench in OA No 155 of 2020. By a judgment dated 29
January 2021, the Central Administrative Tribunal dismissed the OA, holding:
“10. [....] It is, thus, clear that the maternity leave can be granted
to a female government servant only if she has less than two
surviving children. As per her own request, the applicant has
already shown her two children from the first marriage of her
husband as her children and she has been availing benefit in
their respect on many occasions earlier and subsequent to her
marriage. Therefore, for all practical purposes and as far as
respondent department is concerned, she has already two
surviving children and she is taking benefit for them from the
respondent department by way of Child Care Leave and other
benefits.
11. In view of the above, any child born to her now will be
considered only as a third child and cannot be taken as the first
child. It may be true that Viren Partap Singh is first child born to
3

“CAT”

CA 5308/2022
4
her after her first pregnancy with her husband. But, of her own
choice, the applicant has already got the names of other two
children from her husband's first marriage entered in the record
of the office as her children and is availing benefits on their
behalf including Child Care Leave. The Rule position is clear and
for all practical purposes, the applicant has two surviving
children. As such, any child born to her now can only be
considered as third child.
12. In view of the above, the decision of the respondents to reject
her maternity leave is correct even though it may be first
maternity for the applicant herself”

6.

The appellant moved the High Court in a writ petition4 under Article 226 of the

Constitution, calling into question the judgment of the Tribunal, resulting in the
impugned judgment. By the impugned judgment and order dated 16 March 2021, the
High Court dismissed the petition on the ground that there is no perversity or illegality in
the judgment of the CAT. The High Court held:
“12.
A bare perusal of the aforesaid rule would reveal that
maternity leave can be granted to a female Government servant
only if she has less than two surviving children. Though, the
petitioner is not the biological mother of the two children born
from the first wedlock of her husband, she cannot deny the fact
that now she is the mother of them also after having married to
Amar Singh. In this way, the petitioner has already two surviving
children. Not only this, she has also availed CCL for them from
the respondent Department. In this view of the matter, any child
born to her is to be considered as a third child. We are of the
considered view that the CAT has rightly observed in the
impugned order that “....for all practical purposes, the applicant
has two surviving children. As such, any child born to her now
can only be considered as a third child.”

4

CWP No 3460 of 2021

CA 5308/2022
5

7.

Child care leave is provided under Rule 43-C. Rule 43-C is extracted below:
“43-(C). Child Care Leave
(1) A woman Government servant having minor children below
the age of eighteen years and who has no earned leave at her
credit, may be granted child care leave by an authority
competent to grant leave, for a maximum period of two years,
i.e., 730 days during the entire service for taking care of upto two
children whether for rearing or to look after any of their needs like
examination, sickness, etc.
(2) During the period of child care leave, she shall be paid leave
salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on
leave.
(3) Child care leave may be combined with Leave of any other
kind.
(4) Notwithstanding the requirement of production of medical
certificate contained in sub-rule (1) of rule 30 or sub-rule (1) of
rule 31, leave of the kind due and admissible (including
commuted leave not exceeding 60 days and leave not due) upto
a maximum of one year, if applied for, be granted in continuation
with child care leave granted under sub-rule (1).
(5) Child care leave may be availed of in more than one spell.
(6) Child care leave shall not be debited against the leave
account.”

8.

The High Court opined that since the appellant had availed of child care leave in

respect of the biological children of her spouse born from his first marriage, she would
be disentitled to the grant of maternity leave. After her marriage to Amar Singh, she was

CA 5308/2022
6

considered to have two surviving children. The High Court found that she therefore did
not meet the requirement of sub-rule (1) of Rule 43 of having less than two surviving
children for the purpose of being granted maternity leave.
9.

Notice was issued in these proceedings on 1 July 2021. In pursuance of the

order issuing notice, the respondents have entered appearance and have filed a
counter affidavit.
10.

We have heard Mr Akshay Verma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant and Mr Sudarshan Rajan, learned counsel appearing for the second, third and
fourth respondents.
11.

The case of the appellant is that the maternity leave was sought by her on the

birth of her first biological child and the fact that there are two children of her spouse
born from an earlier marriage would not disentitle her under Rule 43 of the Rules of
1972. Counsel for the appellant submitted that though the appellant had availed of child
care leave in respect of her step children, this leave is distinct from maternity leave.
12.

The contention of the respondents is that having taken the benefit of child care

leave in respect of the two children born to the spouse of the appellant from his first
marriage, the appellant was not entitled to maternity leave in respect of the birth of her
own biological child. The appellant was, in the submission of the respondents,

CA 5308/2022
7

disentitled to maternity leave on the ground that she had two surviving children, in terms
of Rule 43 of the Rules of 1972.
13.

The significant issue which falls for determination in the appeal turns on the

interpretation of Rule 43 of the Rules of 1972. The Central Civil Services (Leave) Rules
1972 have been framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution. Rule 43 is
extracted below:
“43. Maternity Leave
(1) A female Government servant (including an apprentice) with
less than two surviving children may be granted maternity leave
by an authority competent to grant leave for a period of (180
days) from the date of its commencement.
(2) During such period, she shall be paid leave salary equal to
the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.
NOTE:- In the case of a person to whom Employees‟ State
Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), applies, the amount of leave
salary payable under this rule shall be reduced by the amount of
benefit payable under the said Act for the corresponding period.
(3) Maternity leave not exceeding 45 days may also be granted
to a female Government servant (irrespective of the number of
surviving children) during the entire service of that female
Government servant in case of miscarriage including abortion on
production of medical certificate as laid down in Rule 19:
Provided that the maternity leave granted and availed of before
the commencement of the CCS (Leave) Amendment Rules,
1995, shall not be taken into account for the purpose of this subrule.
(4)(a) Maternity leave may be combined with leave of any other
kind.

CA 5308/2022
8
(b) Notwithstanding the requirement of production of medical
certificate contained in sub-rule (1) of Rule 30 or sub-rule (1) of
Rule 31, leave of the kind due and admissible (including
commuted leave for a period not exceeding 60 days and leave
not due) up to a maximum of two years may, if applied for, be
granted in continuation of maternity leave granted under sub-rule
(1).
(5) Maternity leave shall not be debited against the leave
account.”

14.

The marginal note to Rule 43 is titled „maternity leave‟. Sub-rule (1) stipulates

that a female government servant with less than two surviving children would be
granted maternity leave for a period of 180 days from the date of its commencement.
Sub-rule (2) stipulates that during the period of maternity leave, the employee is entitled
to leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave. Subrule (3) stipulates that maternity leave not exceeding 45 days may also be granted to a
female government servant, irrespective of the number of surviving children, during the
entire service in case of a miscarriage including an abortion on production of a medical
certificate. Sub-rule (4) stipulates that maternity leave is capable of being combined
with leave of any other kind.
15.

The provisions of Rule 43(1) must be imbued with a purposive construction. In

KH Nazar v. Mathew K Jacob,5 this Court noted that beneficial legislation must be
given a liberal approach:

5

(2020) 14 SCC 126

CA 5308/2022
9
“11. Provisions of a beneficial legislation have to be construed
with a purpose-oriented approach. The Act should receive a
liberal construction to promote its objects. Also, literal
construction of the provisions of a beneficial legislation has to be
avoided. It is the court's duty to discern the intention of the
legislature in making the law. Once such an intention is
ascertained, the statute should receive a purposeful or functional
interpretation
12. In the words of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J., the principles of
statutory construction of beneficial legislation are as follows :
(Workmen case, SCC p. 76, para 4)
“4. The principles of statutory construction are
well settled. Words occurring in statutes of liberal
import such as „social welfare legislation and
human rights‟ legislation are not to be put in
Procrustean beds or shrunk to Lilliputian
dimensions. In construing these legislations the
imposture of literal construction must be avoided
and the prodigality of its misapplication must be
recognised and reduced. Judges ought to be
more concerned with the “colour”, the “content”
and the “context” of such statutes (we have
borrowed the words from Lord Wilberforce's
opinion
in Prenn v. Simmonds [Prenn v. Simmonds,
(1971) 1 WLR 1381 : (1971) 3 All ER 237 (HL)] ).
In the same opinion Lord Wilberforce pointed out
that law is not to be left behind in some island of
literal interpretation but is to enquire beyond the
language, unisolated from the matrix of facts in
which they are set; the law is not to be interpreted
purely on internal linguistic considerations. In one
of the cases cited before us, that is, Surendra
Kumar Verma v. Central Govt. Industrial Tribunalcum-Labour Court , we had occasion to say :
(Surendra Kumar Verma case, SCC p. 447, para
6)

CA 5308/2022
10
„6. … Semantic luxuries are misplaced in the
interpretation of “bread and butter” statutes.
Welfare statutes must, of necessity, receive a
broad interpretation. Where legislation is designed
to give relief against certain kinds of mischief, the
court is not to make inroads by making
etymological excursions.‟ ”
13. While interpreting a statute, the problem or mischief that the
statute was designed to remedy should first be identified and
then a construction that suppresses the problem and advances
the remedy should be adopted.”

16.

In Badshah v. Urmila Badshah Godse,6 a two-judge Bench of this Court

comprising AK Sikri and Ranjana Desai, JJ. ruled that courts must bridge the gap
between law and society through the use of purposive interpretation, where applicable:
“13.3. Thirdly, in such cases, purposive interpretation needs to
be given to the provisions of Section 125 CrPC. While dealing
with the application of a destitute wife or hapless children or
parents under this provision, the Court is dealing with the
marginalised sections of the society. The purpose is to achieve
“social justice” which is the constitutional vision, enshrined in the
Preamble of the Constitution of India. The Preamble to the
Constitution of India clearly signals that we have chosen the
democratic path under the rule of law to achieve the goal of
securing for all its citizens, justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.
It specifically highlights achieving their social justice. Therefore,
it becomes the bounden duty of the courts to advance the
cause of the social justice. While giving interpretation to a
particular provision, the court is supposed to bridge the gap
between the law and society.
14. Of late, in this very direction, it is emphasised that the courts
have to adopt different approaches in “social justice
adjudication”, which is also known as “social context

6

(2014) 1 SCC 188

CA 5308/2022
11
adjudication” as mere “adversarial approach” may not be very
appropriate. There are number of social justice legislations giving
special protection and benefits to vulnerable groups in the
society. Prof. Madhava Menon describes it eloquently:
“It is, therefore, respectfully submitted that ‘social context
judging’ is essentially the application of equality
jurisprudence as evolved by Parliament and the Supreme
Court in myriad situations presented before courts where
unequal parties are pitted in adversarial proceedings and
where courts are called upon to dispense equal justice.
Apart from the social-economic inequalities accentuating the
disabilities of the poor in an unequal fight, the adversarial
process itself operates to the disadvantage of the weaker party.
In such a situation, the Judge has to be not only sensitive to the
inequalities of parties involved but also positively inclined to the
weaker party if the imbalance were not to result in miscarriage of
justice. This result is achieved by what we call social context
judging or social justice adjudication.” [Keynote address on
“Legal Education in Social Context” delivered at National Law
University, Jodhpur on October 12, 2005, available on
http://web.archive.org/web/20061210031743/http:/www.nlujodhp
ur.ac.in/ceireports.htm [last visited on 25-12-2013]]
…
16. The law regulates relationships between people. It prescribes
patterns of behaviour. It reflects the values of society. The role
of the court is to understand the purpose of law in society
and to help the law achieve its purpose. But the law of a
society is a living organism. It is based on a given factual
and social reality that is constantly changing. Sometimes
change in law precedes societal change and is even
intended to stimulate it. In most cases, however, a change in
law is the result of a change in social reality. Indeed, when
social reality changes, the law must change too. Just as
change in social reality is the law of life, responsiveness to
change in social reality is the life of the law. It can be said that
the history of law is the history of adapting the law to society's
changing needs. In both constitutional and statutory
interpretation, the court is supposed to exercise discretion

CA 5308/2022
12
in determining the proper relationship between
subjective and objective purposes of the law.”

the

(emphasis supplied)

17.

For the purpose of adopting an approach which furthers legislative policy, it

would be appropriate to derive some guidance from the provisions of the Maternity
Benefit Act 19617 though, it must be stated at the outset that the Act per se has no
application to the PGIMER as an establishment. Nonetheless, the provisions of the Act
of 1961 are indicative of the object and intent of Parliament in enacting a cognate
legislation on the subject.
18.

Section 3(c) of the Maternity Benefit Act of 1961 defines the expression „delivery‟

to mean the birth of a child. Section 5 provides for the right to payment of maternity
benefit. Section 5 is extracted in its entirety below:
“5. Right to payment of maternity benefit.– (1) Subject to the
provisions of this Act, every woman shall be entitled to, and her
employer shall be liable for, the payment of maternity benefit at
the rate of the average daily wage for the period of her actual
absence, that is to say, the period immediately preceding the day
of her delivery, the actual day of her delivery and any period
immediately following that day.
Explanation.– For the purpose of this sub-section, the average
daily wage‟ means the average of the woman‟s wages payable to
her for the days on which she has worked during the period of
three calendar months immediately preceding the date from
which she absents herself on account of maternity, the minimum

7

“Act of 1961”

CA 5308/2022
13
rate of wage fixed or revised under the Minimum Wages Act,
1948 (11 of 1948), or ten rupees, whichever is the highest.
(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit unless she
has actually worked in an establishment of the employer from
whom she claims maternity benefit, for a period of not less than
eighty days in the twelve months immediately preceding the date
of her expected delivery:
Provided that the qualifying period of eighty days aforesaid shall
not apply to a woman who has immigrated into the State of
Assam and was pregnant at the time of the immigration.
Explanation.– For the purpose of calculating under the subsection the days on which a woman has actually worked in the
establishment, the days for which she has been laid-off or was
on holidays declared under any law for the time being in force to
be holidays with wages, during the period of twelve months
immediately preceding the date of her expected delivery shall be
taken into account.
(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall be entitled
to maternity benefit shall be twenty-six weeks of which not more
than eight weeks shall precede the date of her expected delivery:
Provided that the maximum period entitled to maternity benefit by
a woman having two or more than two surviving children shall be
twelve weeks of which not more than six weeks shall precede the
date of her expected delivery:
Provided further that where a woman dies during this period, the
maternity benefit shall be payable only for the days up to and
including the day of her death:
Provided also that where a woman, having been delivered of a
child, dies during her delivery or during the period immediately
following the date of her delivery for which she is entitled for the
maternity benefit, leaving behind in either case the child, the
employer shall be liable for the maternity benefit for that entire
period but if the child also dies during the said period, then, for
the days up to and including the date of the death of the child.

CA 5308/2022
14
(4) A woman who legally adopts a child below the age of three
months or a commissioning mother shall be entitled to maternity
benefit for a period of twelve weeks from the date the child is
handed over to the adopting mother or the commissioning
mother, as the case may be.
(5) In case where the nature of work assigned to a woman is of
such nature that she may work from home, the employer may
allow her to do so after availing of the maternity benefit for such
period and on such conditions as the employer and the woman
may mutually agree.”

19.

Sub-section (1) of Section 5 confers an entitlement on a woman to the payment

of maternity benefits at a stipulated rate for the period of her actual absence beginning
from the period immediately preceding the day of her delivery, the actual day of her
delivery and any period immediately following that day. Sub-section (3) specifies the
maximum period for which any woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit. These
provisions have been made by Parliament to ensure that the absence of a woman away
from the place of work occasioned by the delivery of a child does not hinder her
entitlement to receive wages for that period or for that matter for the period during which
she should be granted leave in order to look after her child after the birth takes place.
20.

The Act of 1961 was enacted to secure women‟s right to pregnancy and

maternity leave and to afford women with as much flexibility as possible to live an
autonomous life, both as a mother and as a worker, if they so desire. In Municipal

CA 5308/2022
15

Corporation of Delhi v. Female Workers (Muster Roll),8 a two-judge Bench of this
Court placed reliance on the obligations under Articles 14, 15, 39, 42 and 43 of the
Constitution, and India‟s international obligations under the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 19489 and Article 11 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women10 to extend benefits under the Act of 1961 to workers
engaged on a casual basis or on muster roll on daily wages by the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi. The Central Civil Services (Leave) Rules 1972, it is well to bear in
mind, are also formulated to entrench and enhance the objects of Article 15 of the
Constitution and other relevant constitutional rights and protections.
21.

Under Article 15(3) of the Constitution, the State is empowered to enact

beneficial provisions for advancing the interests of women. The right to reproduction
and child rearing has been recognized as an important facet of a person‟s right to
privacy, dignity and bodily integrity under Article 21. 11 Article 42 enjoins the State to
make provisions for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity
relief.
22.

In this context, regard may also be had to several international conventions of the

United Nations that India has ratified. Article 25(2) of the UDHR provides that
8

2000 (3) SCC 224
“UDHR”
10
“CEDAW”
11
Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India, (2017) 10 SCC 1; Suchita Srivastava v. Chandigarh Administration
(2009) 9 SCC 1
9

CA 5308/2022
16

motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance. Article 11(2)(b)
of CEDAW requires states “to introduce maternity leave with pay or comparable social
benefits.” The relevant provision of Article 11 of CEDAW states that:
“Article 11:
1. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women in the field of employment in order
to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women, the same
rights, in particular:
(a) The right to work as an inalienable right of all human beings;
(b) The right to the same employment opportunities, including the
application of the same criteria for selection in matters of
employment;
(c) The right to free choice of profession and employment, the
right to promotion, job security and all benefits and conditions of
service and the right to receive vocational training and retraining,
including apprenticeships, advanced vocational training and
recurrent training;
(d) The right to equal remuneration, including benefits, and to
equal treatment in respect of work of equal value, as well as
equality of treatment in the evaluation of the quality of work;
(e) The right to social security, particularly in cases of retirement,
unemployment, sickness, invalidity and old age and other
incapacity to work, as well as the right to paid leave;
(f) The right to protection of health and to safety in working
conditions, including the safeguarding of the function of
reproduction.
2. In order to prevent discrimination against women on the
grounds of marriage or maternity and to ensure their
effective right to work, States Parties shall take appropriate
measures:

CA 5308/2022
17
(a) To prohibit, subject to the imposition of sanctions, dismissal
on the grounds of pregnancy or of maternity leave and
discrimination in dismissals on the basis of marital status;
(b) To introduce maternity leave with pay or with comparable
social benefits without loss of former employment, seniority
or social allowances;
(c) To encourage the provision of the necessary supporting
social services to enable parents to combine family obligations
with work responsibilities and participation in public life, in
particular through promoting the establishment and development
of a network of child-care facilities;
(d) To provide special protection to women during pregnancy in
types of work proved to be harmful to them.
3. Protective legislation relating to matters covered in this article
shall be reviewed periodically in the light of scientific and
technological knowledge and shall be revised, repealed or
extended as necessary.”
(emphasis supplied)

23.

In alignment with the Constitution as well as the treaties mentioned above, Rule

43(1) of the Rules of 1972 contemplates the grant of maternity leave for a period of 180
days. Independent of the grant of maternity leave, a woman is also entitled to the grant
of child care leave for taking care of her two eldest surviving children whether for
rearing or for looking after any of their needs, such as education, sickness and the like.
Child care leave under Rule 43-C can be availed of not only at the point when the child
is born but at any subsequent period as is evident from the illustrative causes which are
adverted to in the provisions, which have been extracted in the earlier part of the
judgment. Both constitute distinct entitlements.

CA 5308/2022
18

24.

The facts of the present case indicate that the spouse of the appellant had a prior

marriage which had ended as a result of the death of his wife after which the appellant
married him. The fact that the appellant‟s spouse had two biological children from his
first marriage would not impinge upon the entitlement of the appellant to avail maternity
leave for her sole biological child. The fact that she was granted child care leave in
respect of the two biological children born to her spouse from an earlier marriage may
be a matter on which a compassionate view was taken by the authorities at the relevant
time. Gendered roles assigned to women and societal expectations mean that women
are always pressed upon to take a disproportionate burden of childcare work. According
to a „time-use‟ survey conducted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), women in India currently spend upto 352 minutes per day on
unpaid work, 577% more than the time spent by men.12 Time spent in unpaid work
includes childcare. In this context, the support of care work through benefits such as
maternity leave, paternity leave, or child care leave (availed by both parents) by the
state and other employers is essential. Although certain provisions of the Rules of 1972
have enabled women to enter the paid workforce, women continue to bear the primary

12

Organisation
for
Economic
Co-operation
and
Development, 'Time-Use' (OECD
Stat) <https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?datasetcode=TIME_USE#> accessed 22 August 2022

CA 5308/2022
19

responsibility for childcare. The grant of child care leave to the appellant cannot be
used to disentitle her to maternity leave under Rule 43 of the Rules of 1972.
25.

Unless a purposive interpretation were to be adopted in the present case, the

object and intent of the grant of maternity leave would simply be defeated. The grant of
maternity leave under Rules of 1972 is intended to facilitate the continuance of women
in the workplace. It is a harsh reality that but for such provisions, many women would
be compelled by social circumstances to give up work on the birth of a child, if they are
not granted leave and other facilitative measures. No employer can perceive child birth
as detracting from the purpose of employment. Child birth has to be construed in the
context of employment as a natural incident of life and hence, the provisions for
maternity leave must be construed in that perspective.
26.

The predominant understanding of the concept of a “family” both in the law and in

society is that it consists of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who
remain constant over time) and their children. This assumption ignores both, the many
circumstances which may lead to a change in one‟s familial structure, and the fact that
many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships
may take the form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or queer relationships. A
household may be a single parent household for any number of reasons, including the
death of a spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly, the guardians and caretakers (who

CA 5308/2022
20

traditionally occupy the roles of the “mother” and the “father”) of children may change
with remarriage, adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families
may not be typical but they are as real as their traditional counterparts. Such atypical
manifestations of the family unit are equally deserving not only of protection under law
but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The black letter of the
law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from traditional
ones. The same undoubtedly holds true for women who take on the role of motherhood
in ways that may not find a place in the popular imagination.
27.

The facts of the present case, too, indicate that the structure of the appellant‟s

family changed when she took on a parental role with respect to her spouse‟s biological
children from his previous marriage. When the appellant applied to PGIMER for
maternity leave, PGIMER was faced with facts that the law may not have envisaged or
adequately accounted for. When courts are confronted with such situations, they would
do well to attempt to give effect to the purpose of the law in question rather than to
prevent its application.
28.

For the above reasons, we hold that the appellant was entitled to the grant of

maternity leave. The communication of the third respondent denying her the entitlement
was contrary to the provisions of Rule 43. We accordingly set aside the impugned
judgment of the High Court dated 16 March 2021 and the judgment of the CAT dated

CA 5308/2022
21

29 January 2021. The OA filed by the appellant shall in consequence stand allowed and
the appellant shall be granted maternity leave under Rule 43 in terms of the present
judgment. The benefits which are admissible to the appellant shall be released to her
within a period of two months from the date of this order.
29.

The appeal is accordingly allowed.

30.

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.

….....…...….......………………........J.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]

..…....…........……………….…........J.
[A S Bopanna]
New Delhi;
August 16, 2022
CKB

